Particle accelerators [1, 2] can be classified depending from several parameters such as geometry (linear vs. circular), accelerating technology (electrostatic vs. electrodynamics, resonant vs. non-resonant), species of accelerated particles (leptons vs. barions, etc.), particle's energy (from keV to MeV, from GeV to TeV), and applications (high energy physics, physics of matter, medicine, industry, etc.).

Since the primary scope of an accelerator is to bring charged particles to high energy, it is natural to put some accent on that parameter. The average accelerating gradient, or energy gain per unit length (e.g., in MV/m), is a figure of merit which, in linacs, is inversely proportional to the accelerator size, hence to costs of construction.

Historically, the first accelerators exploited static electric field in linear geometry, thus named _electrostatic accelerators_[3, 4]. Charged particles, typically electrons, protons or ions, were produced either by an external radioactive source, or extracted by an electrod brought to high static voltage \(\Delta V\). The accelerating electric field is conservative (irrotational), and the kinetic energy \(\Delta T\) gained by each particle of charge \(q\)_internally_ to the accelerator, is equal to the variation of the electric potential energy:

\[\oint\vec{E}d\vec{l}=0\Leftrightarrow\vec{\nabla}\times\vec{E}=0\ \ \Rightarrow\vec{E}=-\vec{\nabla}V\ \ \Rightarrow\Delta T=-q\,\Delta V=-\Delta U \tag{1}\]

The final energy of a free particle _injected_ into an electrostatic accelerator results:

\[E_{f}=E_{i}-\Delta U=m_{0}c^{2}+T_{i}+\Delta T=m_{0}c^{2}+T_{f}\ \ \Rightarrow\ \ \Delta E=\Delta T=-q\,\Delta V \tag{2}\]

These accelerators are able to provide kinetic energies from tens of keV to tens of MeV. The main limitation to the maximum energy gain is from discharges happening when the electric field becomes higher than the dielectric rigidity of the medium in which the accelerator is immersed (commonly gas like \(N_{2}\) and \(CO_{2}\)). Electrods were often shaped with spherical geometries to minimize the local field. A second limitation is related to the capability of the power supply to compensate for the total current emission, which includes both the main beam and spurious currents. In general, the maximum voltage of electrostatic accelerators is inversely proportional to the extracted beam current. Electrostatic accelerators produce either continuous or pulsed beam.

In 1930-1940s, the replacement of static voltages with rotational electric fields opened the door to the so-called _electrodynamic accelerators_[2]. These are supplied by radiofrequency (RF) power generators exploiting electric field varying with time. Such generators allowed higher accelerating fields at the tolerable expense of moderate average power.

Time-oscillating electric fields imply in most cases synchronization of the incoming particle beam with the accelerating field, which has to have the desired amplitude and phase at the arrival time of particles in the accelerating region. Electrodynamic accelerators are therefore further classified in _resonant_ and _non-resonant_, depending if a synchronism condition has to be satisfied or not. Synchronization implies the production of pulsed beams, whose repetition frequency is therefore equal or a sub-multiple of the generator frequency. Each "packet" of particles is called _bunch_ in the literature.

All these kinds of particle accelerators developed almost simultaneously, both in the linear and circular geometry. One of the advantages of circular accelerators, such as _betatrons_, _cyclotrons_ and _synchrotrons_, is that the same accelerating gradient is applied to the circulating particles for, in principle, a very large number of turns. Hence, the energy gain per turn can be small. In reality, as we will see, the maximum beam energy is limited by the size of the accelerator (scaling with particle's energy), radiation emitted by the accelerated charges and, consequently, power consumption.

### Electrostatic Accelerators

#### Cockcroft and Walton

Cockcroft and Walton invented the "multistage cascade generator" in 1932. In this electrostatic accelerator, the high voltage (\(<\)10 MV or so) is generated by means of a low-voltage oscillator followed by a series of diodes and capacitors, to multiply the initial potential energy, as shown in Fig. 2.1. The accelerator can be used either in continuous or pulsed mode, the latter one for reaching higher peak currents for the same average current level.

In the very first version, protons were produced from ionization of gaseous Hydrogen atoms through discharge. The gained kinetic energy of 0.4 MeV allowed protons (whose rest energy amounts to 938 MeV) to break the Coulomb barrier of Litium atoms in a thin foil, which then transmuted into Helium according to \(p+Li_{3}^{7}\to 2He_{2}^{4}\).

#### Van de Graaff

The Van de Graaff accelerator, first built in 1931, is an electro-mechanic system in which a rotating insulating belt is charged by effluvium (corona discharge) by a low-voltage generator (\(\sim\)10 kV). The high voltage (\(<\)10 MV) is generated by the mechanical deposition of charges from the belt onto an electrod. The electrod produces particle beam up to \(\sim\)10 MeV kinetic energy in continuous mode.

A more recent and energetic version of this accelerator is the so-called _Tandem_ Van de Graaff. Let us consider negative ions of charge \(-e\) produced by an external radioactive source. They are accelerated by an electrostatic voltage in an insulating gas, so gaining a kinetic energy equal to \(e\Delta V\) per ion. At the point of maximum energy, the ions pass through a "stripper" (in the form of a thin foil or gas jet) which removes (\(n+1\)) electrons per ion. Each ion has now a positive charge (\(-1+n+1\))\(e=ne\), which can be further accelerated from the positive high voltage to ground. In short, the same voltage is used to accelerate twice, and in proportion to the number of electrons removed by the stripper, see Fig. 2.2. The total gained kinetic energy per ion is \(\Delta T=e\Delta V+ne\Delta V=(n+1)e\Delta V\). Since the stripper capacity is proportional to the atomic number of the stripper element, the gained kinetic energy is inversely proportional to the intensity of the accelerated beam surviving the stripper interaction.

The Tandem is particularly convenient to accelerate heavy ions because the high number of electrons to be possibly removed leads to a large multiplication factor of the accelerating voltage. For example, a static voltage \(\Delta V=15\) MV applied twice

Figure 2.1: Left: schematic of a Cockcroft-Walton voltage multiplier. Right: 870 kV Cockcroft-Walton proton injector at PSI, Switzerland, in operation since 1980s. The CW generator is on the left, the particle source is on the right. (Copyright Paul Scherrer Institute/Markus Fischer)to \(Au^{-}\) ions, in combination with a stripper capacity of \(n+1=14\), leads to a kinetic energy exceeding 200 MeV per ion. The Tandem is often used as injector of another class of accelerators commonly devoted to nuclear physics, the cyclotrons.

### 2.2 Electrodynamic Accelerators

#### Drift Tube Linacs

Electrodynamic accelerators exploit time-varying electric and magnetic field. Let us recall Maxwell's equations for the time-varying e.m. field in vacuum:

\[\vec{E}=-\vec{\nabla}V-\frac{\partial\vec{A}}{\partial t}\quad \Rightarrow\quad\vec{\nabla}\times\vec{E}=-\frac{\partial\vec{B}}{\partial t }\quad\Rightarrow\quad\oint_{L}\vec{E}d\vec{l}=-\frac{\partial\Phi(\vec{B})}{ \partial t} \tag{2.3}\]

with \(\vec{A}\) the vector magnetic potential, \(\vec{B}\) the magnetic flux density, and \(\Phi(\vec{B})\) the magnetic flux through a region delimited by the closed path \(L\). The l.h.s. equation suggests that there exists an electric potential generating \(\vec{E}\) such that this field is made null by the presence of a magnetic potential outside the spatial region in which \(\vec{\nabla}V\neq 0\). Namely, a time-varying longitudinal electric field can be produced under certain boundary conditions. At the same time, the r.h.s. expression says that by modulating in time the magnetic flux over a certain spatial region, a rotational electric field is generated such that a net energy gain (or loss) is obtained over the closed path concatenated with the magnetic flux. Namely, the electric field is not conservative (rotational).

The former of these two interpretations found application in the Ising and Wideroe's _Drift Tube Linac_ (DTL), first developed in 1924-1927 (later on also engineered by Sloan and Lawrence). In a DTL, a series of metallic tubes mask the accelerated particles from any external force, like Faraday cages. Two successive tubes make a "gap", in which a longitudinal electric field oscillating with time at frequency \(f_{RF}\) is established by a generator at relatively low voltage, as sketched in Fig. 2.3-top left. Wideroe's DTL is classified as a "\(\pi\)-mode structure" because the electric field vector repeats identically every two cells, while it shows phase opposition at consecutive cells. This means that particles are bunched, but the bunches must be spaced with a free "bucket" in between.

Figure 2.2: Principle of operation of a Tandem Van de Graaff accelerator

Net acceleration is gained only if the electric field in the gap is synchronized with the particle's arrival time at any specific gap. The synchronism condition is \(2f_{RF}=hf\), with \(f\) the frequency at which particles happen to be at successive gaps, and \(h\in\dot{\mathbb{N}}\). The factor 2 is owed to the fact that, for a \(\pi\)-mode structure, the field phase should vary by half period in the time particles take to reach the next gap.

For any particle velocity \(\beta_{i}\) through the \(i\)-th tube of length \(L_{i}\), the condition of synchronization is:

\[2f_{RF} =hf=h\,\frac{\beta_{i}c}{L_{i}}\ \ \Rightarrow\ \ \left\{\begin{array}{l}L_{i}=\frac{h \lambda_{RF}\beta_{i}}{2}\\ G_{i}=\frac{\Delta\,V_{i}}{L_{i}}=\frac{2\Delta\,V_{i}}{h\lambda_{ RF}\beta_{i}}\end{array}\right. \tag{4}\]

As the particle gains energy and its velocity increases, the tube length has to increase too. The local accelerating gradient \(G_{i}\) is maximized by short wavelengths of the RF generator. For example, \(f_{RF}\approx 30\,\mathrm{MHz}\) implies a single tube not shorter than \(\sim\)10 m when particles' velocity approaches \(c\). A compact DTL forces to consider particles in non-relativistic motion (e.g., protons or ions) and/or short \(\lambda_{RF}\). However, the wavelength of the oscillators cannot be made arbitrarily short, because when \(\lambda_{RF}\) approaches the size of the electrical components, these start emitting radiation, so diminishing the energetic efficiency of the generator.

An _Alvarez's structure_ can be intended as a special case of DTL, in which the electrodes are part of a resonant macro-structure, as shown in Fig. 3-bottom left. The resonant frequency of the structure matches the frequency of the RF generator. In practice, the whole system is isolated in a metallic tank and, in most used configurations, the tubes are alternatively connected to an excited coaxial line and to the grounded outer wall. This accelerator is a \(2\pi\)-mode structure because consecutive bunches can be accelerated in adjacent gaps.

Unlike the Wideroe's DTL, where the charges travel from one tube to the next one by passing through the RF generator, the Alvarez's structure is a resonant cavity, where the particles are immersed in a time-varying accelerating field established by the inner geometry of the structure.

#### Cyclotron

The principle of RF acceleration applied to a circular path brought to the invention of the _cyclotron_. In Lawrence's cyclotron (first built in 1932 at Berkeley, USA), the gap is constituted by two facing electrodes, called "dees" because of their geometry. The dees, which have analogous function of the tubes in the Wideroe's linac, are connected to an oscillator. The dees are immersed in a uniform vertical magnetic field. This generates the Lorentz's force to drive particles on a curved path (see Fig. 4-left plot). Particles originate at the center of the cyclotron, either from a radioactive source (electrons) or injected there by a lower energy Tandem accelerator.

[MISSING_PAGE_EMPTY:321]

a well-defined bandwidth of functionality. Within such technological limitations, the cyclotron can provide up to few hundreds of MeV kinetic energy per nucleon, and it is called _synchro-cyclotron_.

The second equation shows that the larger the particle's longitudinal momentum is, the larger the radius of curvature becomes. Thus, particles follow spiralizing orbits starting from the center of the cyclotron, where they are injected, and they escape in correspondence of the ultimate bending radius. It is now clear that the maximum kinetic energy gained by the particle is basically constrained by the size of the cyclotron. Since the whole frame is immersed in a magnetic field of azimuthal symmetry, the maximum kinetic energy is proportional to the _volume_ of the system.

A second version of Lawrence's cyclotron was developed, and is today largely used, which exploits a different mechanism of synchronization. Equation 5 shows that Lawrence's angular frequency can be kept constant, and so \(\omega_{RF}\) can be, by properly modulating the magnetic field as function of the beam energy. In other words, as the particle's energy increases, the instantaneous value of \(B_{y}\) makes the particle shifting on a larger curved path. However, in correspondence of this new path, the magnetic field is made stronger such that \(B_{y}/\gamma=const\)\(\forall r\).

But, how could \(B_{y}(r)\) be made stronger at larger \(r\)? For example, by shaping the inner surface of the magnetic poles so to increase the field line density at larger distances from the cyclotron center, as sketched in Fig. 5. This solution, however, induces vertical _defocusing_, i.e., any vertically displaced particle is also subject to a horizontal component of the magnetic field, or field gradient. This pushes the particle further away from the horizontal plane (see the composition of velocity and field in Fig. 5 for a positive charge exiting the plane on the right and entering on the left). After several turns, particles can reach the dees' upper and lower boundaries, and eventually to get lost.

To overcome such unstable motion, the azimuthal symmetry of the magnetic poles is broken, and the poles are split into curved sectors, see Fig. 4-right picture. The curved shape of their entrance and exit face generates an overall vertical focusing force, i.e., particles which tend to escape in the vertical plane are brought back towards it, so performing vertical oscillations along their orbit. This kind of cyclotron

Figure 5: Lateral section of the magnetic poles of a cyclotron. By virtue of the poles shaping, a charge vertically displaced with respect to the horizontal plane is subject to a horizontal component of the magnetic field. This produces a vertical defocusing Lorentz’s force. (Image courtesy of S. Tazzari)

guarantees both horizontal and vertical stability. It is named _split-sector cyclotron_ by virtue of the poles geometry, or _isochronous cyclotron_ because of the constancy of the revolution period. The split poles geometry leaves free space in between the poles for RF generators, beam diagnostics, injection and extraction lines.

##### 2.2.2.1 Discussion:Protons in a Synchro-Cyclotron

Cyclotrons are suited to accelerate protons or ions in a compact geometry, say, \(R\sim 1-10\) m, for two reasons. First, heavy particles can reach relatively high total energies at low longitudinal momentum, which implies small bending radii. Second, the radius can be kept small by virtue of a multi-Tesla magnetic field generated by superconducting magnets. In both situations, particles move in a weakly relativistic regime.

As a case study, let us consider protons accelerated in a synchro-cyclotron of radius R = 1 m and immersed in a 4 T magnetic field. They are injected at the kinetic energy of 10 MeV. The energy gain per turn is determined by the peak accelerating voltage between the dees, e.g., 100 kV. What is the number of turns required to reach the extraction energy, and what the turn-by-turn variation of the orbit radius? What is the total relative variation of the RF angular frequency? What would these be in case of electrons, instead?

Equation 2.5 is used to calculate the maximum longitudinal momentum, i.e., the momentum in correspondence of the maximum radius of curvature: \(p_{z,max}\approx 0.3B_{y}\,R=1.2\) GeV/c. It is easy to show that protons (\(m_{\,p}c^{2}=0.938\) GeV) are still weakly relativistic at the extraction point, since their kinetic energy results:

\[T_{max}=E_{max}-m_{\,p}c^{2}=\sqrt{(p_{max}c)^{2}+(m_{\,p}c^{2})^{2}}-m_{\,p}c ^{2}=0.585GeV<m_{\,p}c^{2} \tag{2.6}\]

Hence, we can write \(T\approx\frac{p^{2}}{2m_{\,p}}\), and for the turn-by-turn variation of the orbit radius, respectively at the beginning and at the end of acceleration, we get:

\[\frac{\Delta p}{p}=\frac{\Delta R}{R}\approx\frac{1}{2}\frac{\Delta T}{T}= \frac{0.1MeV}{2T}=[8.5\times 10^{-5},\,5\times 10^{-3}] \tag{2.7}\]

The relative energy gain per turn is small, and so is the relative variation of the curvature radius. Consequently, the number of turns to reach the maximum energy is large, \(N_{t}=\frac{T_{max}-T_{i}}{\Delta T}=5750\).

By virtue of the synchronism condition \(\omega_{RF}\propto\omega\) (with \(\omega\) the revolution frequency), the relative variation of the RF frequency over the whole accelerating loop is the same of the revolution frequency:

\[\frac{\Delta\omega_{RF}}{\omega_{RF,i}}=\frac{\Delta\omega}{\omega_{i}}=\gamma _{i}\,\Delta\left(\frac{1}{\gamma}\right)=-\frac{\Delta\gamma}{\gamma_{f}} \tag{2.8}\]

The initial and final total particle's energy is \(E=T+m_{\,p}c^{2}=0.948\) GeV and 1.523 GeV, respectively, hence \(\gamma_{i}=1.01\) and \(\gamma_{f}=1.62\). The total relative (negative) variation of the frequency amounts to \(\sim 40\%\).

In case we had electrons (\(m_{e}c^{2}=0.511\) MeV), instead, they would behave as ultra-relativistic particles during the entire loop, since already at the injection \(T_{i}\gg m_{e}c^{2}\), therefore \(p\propto T\). The relative variation of longitudinal momentum and of curvature radius at the beginning and at the end of the accelerating loop is therefore approximately as twice as the one in Eq. 7 for non-relativistic particles.

The relative variation of the RF is calculated through Eq. 8, For electrons it results \(\gamma_{i}=21\) and \(\gamma_{f}=2349\), hence \(\Delta\omega/\omega_{i}\approx 1\), which is not practical. We conclude that it is not possible to keep RF and electrons synchronous during the whole ramp.

#### Betatron

The "resonant" electrodynamic accelerators considered so far exploit the time-varying nature of the electric field introduced in the l.h.s. of Eq. 3. The _betatron_, invented by D. Kerst in 1940, is a circular electrodynamic accelerator which, instead, relies on the time-variation of the magnetic field flux. This generates an electric field tangent to the orbit, according to the r.h.s. of Eq. 3. However, only a specific spatial distribution of \(B_{y}(t)\) guarantees uniform centripetal acceleration _and_, stability of the orbital motion. To show this, we put attention to the motion in the horizontal (bending) plane. The integral and differential equation for the azimuthal electric field is:

\[\left\{\begin{array}{l}\oint\vec{E}_{\theta}(r)d\vec{l}=-\frac{\partial\Phi( B_{y})}{\partial t}=-\frac{\partial}{\partial t}\int_{S}(\vec{B}\cdot\hat{n})dS^{ \prime}=-S\frac{\partial}{\partial t}\left(\frac{1}{3}\int_{S}B_{y}dS^{\prime }\right)=-\pi r^{2}\frac{\partial(B_{y})}{\partial t}\\ (\vec{\nabla}\times\vec{E})_{z}=\frac{1}{r}\left[\frac{\partial(rE_{\theta})}{ \partial r}-\frac{\partial E_{r}}{\partial\theta}\right]=\left[\frac{E_{\theta }}{r}+\frac{\partial E_{\theta}}{\partial r}-\frac{1}{r}\frac{\partial E_{r}} {\partial\theta}\right]=-\frac{\partial B_{y}}{\partial t}\end{array}\right. \tag{9}\]

The Top row in Eq. 9 describes the effect of a time-varying magnetic field _averaged_ over a surface of area \(S=\pi r^{2}\). The Bottom row in Eq. 9 describes the dependence of \(E_{\theta}\) on the _local_ value of \(B_{y}(r)\), at any fixed \(r\). The partial derivatives of the electric field in this equation are both zero. Indeed, since the curl is calculated for an infinitesimally small variation of \(r\) around its nominal value, \(E_{\theta}\) is constant in proximity of \(r\). Moreover, by virtue of the cylindrical symmetry of the system, \(E_{r}\) is independent from \(\theta\).

In both equations, if the variation of \(B_{y}\) with time is linear, the absolute value of the electric field \(E_{\theta}\) is constant. The absence of RF acceleration classifies the betatron as a "non-resonant" accelerator.

By simplifying Eq. 9, we find for \(E_{\theta}\):

\[\left\{\begin{array}{l}2\pi rE_{\theta}(r)=-\pi r^{2}\frac{\partial(B_{y}) }{\partial t}\\ \Rightarrow\ \ \frac{\partial B_{y}(r)}{\partial t}=\frac{1}{2}\frac{ \partial(B_{y}(r))}{\partial t}\ \ \ \forall r\\ \frac{E_{\theta}}{r}=-\frac{\partial B_{y}}{\partial t}\end{array}\right. \tag{10}\]In conclusion, the variation of the local magnetic field with time has to be half the time-variation of the field averaged over the orbital surface. This spatial field distribution can be guaranteed, for example, by shaping the magnetic poles as in Fig. 6. Such shaping is opposite to the one of the Lawrence's cyclotron in Fig. 5. Namely, the betatron naturally provides vertical focusing and therefore stability of the vertical motion (_betatron oscillations_).

Like cyclotrons, betatrons are limited in maximum kinetic energy by the size or, better, the volume of the entire apparatus. But, unlike cyclotrons, the variation with time of the magnetic flux and the required azimuthal symmetry of this field over relatively large areas, prevent the adoption of superconducting magnets. This typically makes the energy gain per turn smaller in betatrons with respect to cyclotrons of comparable size. For this reason, cyclotrons and, in particular, sector-cyclotrons are often adopted for accelerating heavy particles, with application to nuclear physics experiments, medicine, and industry. Betatrons are most suited for electron acceleration.

#### Weak Focusing

The azimuthal symmetry of the magnetic field in cyclotrons and betatrons leads to the need of a spatial field gradient to keep the particles' motion stable. We now wonder what is the range of the field gradient needed to obtain stability, and what oscillation amplitude is induced by such gradient. We limit our analysis to linear focusing, i.e., the magnetic field is expanded in the particle's coordinates, but only the linear terms are kept. It is convenient to re-write the field gradient as a dimensionless quantity, by normalizing it to the value of the dipolar field component and to the curvature radius of the reference orbit:

\[\begin{array}{l}B_{y}\approx B_{0}+\left(\frac{\partial B_{y}}{\partial x} \right)_{y=0}x=B_{0}\left(1+\frac{R}{B_{0}}\frac{\partial B_{y}}{\partial x} \right)\frac{x}{R}\equiv B_{0}\left(1-n\frac{x}{R}\right)\\ \\ \Rightarrow n=-\frac{R}{B_{0}}\frac{\partial B_{y}}{\partial x}\end{array} \tag{11}\]

The coefficient \(n\) is called _field index_.

Figure 6: Lateral section of a betatron and main components. (Original picture courtesy of S. Tazzari)

In the horizontal plane, the motion is stable as long as the Lorentz's force counteracts and overwhelms in absolute value the centripetal force, at each local curvature radius \(r\). This condition is sufficient for the particle not to escape from the design orbit:

\[\begin{array}{l}q\,v_{z}\,B_{y}=q\,v_{z}\,B_{0}\left(1-n\,\frac{x}{R}\right)>m \,\frac{v_{z}^{2}}{r};\\ \frac{p_{z}}{R}\left(1-n\,\frac{x}{R}\right)>\,\frac{p_{z}}{r};\\ 1-n\,\frac{x}{R}>\,\frac{R}{r}\approxq\frac{R}{R\left(1+x/R\right)}\approxq 1-\frac{x}{R}.\end{array} \tag{2.12}\]

\(\Rightarrow n<1\)

In the vertical plane, the stability is guaranteed by a weaker field at larger orbit radii:

\[\frac{\partial\,B_{y}}{\partial\,x}<0\Rightarrow n>0 \tag{2.13}\]

In conclusion, stability in both transverse planes is guaranteed by \(0<n<1\). Because of the small value of \(n\), the action of the magnetic force is said _weak focusing_.

The equation of motion in the horizontal plane, in polar coordinates in the laboratory frame, is:

\[m(\vec{r}-\dot{\theta}^{2}r)=-q\,v_{z}\,B_{y} \tag{2.14}\]

The three terms are expanded as follows:

\[\left\{\begin{array}{l}m\vec{r}=m\vec{x}.\\ \\ -m\dot{\theta}^{2}r=-m\,\frac{v_{z}^{2}}{r}=-\frac{p_{z}^{2}}{mr}=-\frac{(q\, B_{y}\,R)^{2}}{m\,R\left(1+x/R\right)}=\\ \approxq-\frac{(q\,B_{y})^{2}R}{m}(1-\frac{x}{R})=-\frac{(q\,B_{y})^{2}}{m}R+ \frac{(q\,B_{y})^{2}}{m}x.\\ \\ -q\,v_{z}\,B_{y}=-q\,\frac{p_{z}}{m}\,B_{0}\left(1-n\,\frac{x}{R}\right)=-\frac {(q\,B_{0})^{2}R}{m}\left(1-n\,\frac{x}{R}\right)=\\ =-\frac{(q\,B_{y})^{2}}{m}R+\frac{(q\,B_{y})^{2}}{m}nx.\end{array}\right. \tag{2.15}\]

By plugging all terms in Eq. 2.15 into Eq. 2.14, we obtain:

\[\vec{x}+\left(\frac{q\,B_{0}}{m}\right)^{2}(1-n)x=0 \tag{2.16}\]

A similar equation is found for the vertical plane, where we make use of \((\vec{\nabla}\times\vec{B})_{z}=0\):

\[\begin{array}{l}m\vec{y}=-q\,v_{z}\,B_{x}=-q\,\frac{p_{z}}{m}\,\frac{ \partial\,B_{x}}{\partial\,y}\,y=\frac{q^{\,2}\,B_{0}R}{m}\,\frac{\partial\, B_{y}}{\partial\,x}\,y=-\frac{(q\,B_{0})^{2}}{m}ny;\\ \\ \vec{y}+\left(\frac{q\,B_{0}}{m}\right)^{2}ny=0\end{array} \tag{2.17}\]As expected, the motion in both planes is bounded and identical to a pure harmonic oscillator only if the condition \(0<n<1\) is satisfied. The angular frequency \(\omega_{L}=(q\,B_{0}/m)^{2}\) is the Lawrence's frequency. In both planes, it is modulated by a coefficient smaller than 1. This translates into a wavelength of oscillation in the horizontal plane:

\[\lambda_{x}=\frac{2\pi v_{z}}{\omega_{L}\sqrt{1-n}}=\frac{2\pi\,R}{\sqrt{1-n}}> \,2\pi\,R \tag{2.18}\]

In practice, a full oscillation is completed after more than one turn. This can also be seen as if the circular orbit translate in the bending plane under the effect of the magnetic field, in a periodic motion of period \(\lambda_{x}\). The region of space accessible to the particles is comparable to the orbit radius \(R\).

## References

* (1) A. Sessler, E. Wilson, _Engines of Discovery_ (World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., Singapore, 2007)
* (2) M. Conte, W.W. MacKay, _An Introduction to the Physics of Particle Accelerators_, 2nd edn. (Published by World Scientific, 2008), pp. 1-34. ISBN: 978-981-277-960-1
* (3) D.A. Bromley, The development of electrostatic accelerators. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Ser. **122**, 1 (1974)
* (4) E. Persico, E. Ferrari, S.E. Segre, _Principles of Particle Accelerators_ (W.A. Benjamin Inc., 1968)

