The main characteristics of synchrotron radiation are recalled, including intensity, spectral, and angular distribution. Starting from the Lienard-Wiechert retarded potentials, the physical meaning of retarded time is discussed. The power radiated by a charged particle in a dipole magnet is calculated, and it is shown to be a Lorentz's invariant. Its formulation is given for the case of linear and centripetal acceleration, representative of, respectively, RF acceleration in a linac, magnetic deflection in a synchrotron.

### 1 Radiated Power

#### 1.1 Retarded Potentials

A moving charge \(q\) in vacuum generates e.m. field at a distance \(\vec{R}=R\hat{n}=\vec{r}-\vec{r}^{\prime}\), which can be derived from the scalar and vector Lienard-Wiechert "retarded" potentials [1]:

\[\left\{\begin{array}{l}\phi(\vec{r},t)=\frac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}}\int_{V}d^{3 }\vec{r}^{\prime}\frac{\rho(\vec{r}^{\prime},t^{\prime})}{|\vec{r}-\vec{r}^{ \prime}|}\\ \\ \vec{A}(\vec{r},t)=\frac{\mu_{0}}{4\pi}\int_{V}d^{3}\vec{r}^{\prime}\frac{| \vec{r}^{\prime},t^{\prime})}{|\vec{r}-\vec{r}^{\prime}|}\end{array}\right., \tag{1}\]

where \(\rho(\vec{r}^{\prime},t^{\prime})\) and \(\vec{j}(\vec{r}^{\prime},t^{\prime})\) are, respectively, the 3-D charge density and current density at the position \(\vec{r}^{\prime}\), and the observation is done at the position \(\vec{r}\), see Fig. 1.

The source-observer distance is evaluated at the observation time, \(\vec{R}=\vec{R}(t)\). The source is evaluated at the retarded time \(t^{\prime}=t-\frac{|\vec{R}(t)|}{c}\), which takes into account the time needed by radiation to travel the distance \(\vec{R}\) from the source point to the observation point. In other words, the field perceived at the point P accumulates all contributions generated by Q, from the past to the observation time, until the very last instant useful for the light to reach P at the time \(t\). Such instant is indeed the retarded time \(t^{\prime}\).

Since the source point Q moves, the distance \(\overline{QP}\) changes with time. The distance at the observation time \(t\) is the distance at the time \(t^{\prime}\) plus the space traveled by Q at velocity \(\vec{v}\) in the time interval \(t-t^{\prime}\):

\[|\vec{R}(t)|=|\vec{R}(t^{\prime})|-\hat{n}\vec{v}(t^{\prime}-t)=R(t^{\prime})- \hat{n}\vec{v}\frac{R(t^{\prime})}{c}=R(t^{\prime})(1-\hat{n}\vec{\beta})_{t^{ \prime}} \tag{7.2}\]

The negative sign of \(\hat{n}\) is for a vector directed from Q (source) to P (observer). The velocity term in Eq. 7.2 can be interpreted as the coefficient to pass from the temporal coordinate of the retarded time to the observation time:

\[\begin{array}{l}\frac{dt^{\prime}}{dt}=1-\frac{1}{c}\frac{dR(t)}{dt}=1-\frac {1}{c}\frac{dR(t^{\prime})}{dt^{\prime}}\frac{dt^{\prime}}{dt}\\ \Rightarrow\frac{dt^{\prime}}{dt}=\frac{1}{1+\frac{dR(t^{\prime})}{dt^{\prime }}}=\frac{1}{(1-\hat{n}\vec{\beta})_{t^{\prime}}}\end{array} \tag{7.3}\]

Equation 7.2 allows us to re-write the potentials in Eq. 7.1, and therefore to derive the fields in the case of static potentials, as function of variables all evaluated at the retarded time \(t^{\prime}\):

\[\left\{\begin{array}{l}\phi(\vec{r},t)=\frac{q}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}}\left[\frac {1}{R(1-\hat{n}\vec{\beta})}\right]_{t^{\prime}}\\ \\ \vec{A}(\vec{r},t)=\frac{q\mu_{0}}{4\pi}\left[\frac{\vec{\beta}}{R(1-\hat{n} \vec{\beta})}\right]_{t^{\prime}}\\ \\ \Downarrow\end{array}\right. \tag{7.4}\]

\[\left\{\begin{array}{l}\vec{E}=-\vec{\nabla}\phi=\frac{q}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}} \frac{1}{(1-\hat{n}\vec{\beta})_{t^{\prime}}^{3}}\left\{\frac{1}{\gamma^{2}} \frac{(\hat{n}-\vec{\beta})}{R^{2}}+\frac{\hat{n}\times[(\hat{n}-\vec{\beta}) \times\hat{\vec{\beta}}]}{cR}\right\}_{t^{\prime}}\\ \\ \vec{B}=\vec{\nabla}\times\vec{A}=\frac{\hat{n}}{c}\times\vec{E}\end{array}\right\} \tag{7.5}\]

Figure 7.1: Geometry of a charge Q moving in the plane (x, y). P is the observation point

The first term in brackets of the electric field is denominated "near" field. In the non-relativistic limit (\(\beta\to 0\)), the field vector aligns to the direction of observation, and it reduces to the classical Coulomb field with radial symmetry. In accelerators, it plays a role, for example, in the interaction of charged particles within the same bunch. This so-called "space charge" force is suppressed at high beam energies, as already derived in Eq. 1.63.

The second term in brackets is denominated "far" field. It is always normal to the direction of observation. This is the radiated field, whose intensity dominates over the near field intensity at large distances from the source, by virtue of the weaker dependence from \(R\).

#### Larmor's Formula

The e.m. power radiated by a single particle in the non-relativistic limit is calculated by evaluating the volume integral of the Poynting vector (in units of \(J/sec/m^{2}\)) associated to the peak value of the far field (\(c^{2}=\epsilon_{0}\mu_{0}\)):

\[\vec{S}=\tfrac{1}{\mu_{0}}\left(\vec{E}\times\vec{B}\right)=c^{2}\epsilon_{0} \vec{E}\times\tfrac{\hat{n}}{c}\times\vec{E}=c\epsilon_{0}|\vec{E}|^{2}\hat{n} \tag{7.6}\]

For \(\beta\to 0\):

\[\begin{array}{l}\vec{E}\approx\tfrac{q}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}}\left(\tfrac{\hat{ n}\times\hat{n}\times\hat{\beta}}{c\,\hat{R}}\right)_{t^{\prime}}=\tfrac{q}{4 \pi\epsilon_{0}}\left(\tfrac{\hat{\beta}\sin\theta}{c\,\hat{R}}\right)_{t^{ \prime}}\hat{k}\\ \\ \Rightarrow P=\int_{\Omega}|\vec{S}\cdot\hat{n}|R^{2}d\Omega=c\epsilon_{0}\tfrac{ q^{2}}{16\pi^{2}\epsilon_{0}^{2}}\tfrac{\hat{\beta}^{2}}{c^{2}\,R^{2}}\,R^{2}\int_{0}^{2 \pi}d\phi\int_{0}^{\pi}d\theta\sin^{3}\theta=\\ \\ =\tfrac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}}\tfrac{2}{3}\tfrac{q^{2}}{c^{3}}|\vec{a}|^{2}= \tfrac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}}\tfrac{2}{3}\tfrac{q^{2}}{m_{0}^{2}c^{3}}|\tfrac{d \tilde{p}}{dt}|^{2}\end{array} \tag{7.7}\]

The integral assume azimuthal symmetry around the observation radius \(R\). \(\theta\) is the angle in the plane of motion between the particle's velocity \(\vec{\beta}\) and the direction of observation \(\hat{n}\). \(\Omega=2\pi\int d\theta\sin^{2}\theta\) is the solid angle through which the Poynting vector propagates. The whole integration \(\int d\phi\int d\theta\) amounts to \(8\pi/3\).

Equation 7.7 is called "Larmor's formula". Since it was derived for \(\beta\to 0\), it applies either to the reference frame in which the particle is at rest (but, for example, still moving at relativistic velocity in the laboratory frame), or to a charged particle instantaneously at rest in the laboratory frame. If the particle is constantly at rest, the field perceived at the observation point does not change with time, i.e., the retarded time coincides with the observation time, \(t^{\prime}=t\).

#### Schwinger's Formula

The relativistic expression of the radiated power was derived by Schwinger, who demonstrated that it is a Lorentz's invariant. This can be understood by realizing that the power is the variation of the particle's energy with time, and that energy and time transform in the same manner under Lorentz transformations.

For the relativistic case, the acceleration squared in Larmor's formula is replaced by the square of the relativistic force divided by the rest mass. In covariant form, this is the scalar self-product of the 4-vector force (see Eq. 19), which is indeed a Lorentz's invariant:

\[P=-\frac{1}{4\pi\,\epsilon_{0}}\frac{2}{3}\frac{q^{2}}{c^{3}}\frac{F^{\mu}\,F _{\mu}}{m_{0}^{2}} \tag{190}\]

The 4-vector force is defined as the derivative of total energy and momentum with respect to the proper time interval, which is a Lorentz's invariant itself. Hence, the radiated power is demonstrated to be Lorentz's invariant if the time-derivatives preserve their form when energy and momentum are evaluated in a different inertial reference frame.

The demonstration, reported below, is instructive because it offers a practical expression for the calculation of the emitted power for specific configurations of the acceleration vector, as we will see later on. The 4-vector momentum's components are transformed from the laboratory frame (\(\frac{E}{c}\), \(\vec{p}\)) to the moving frame (\(\frac{E^{\prime}}{c}\), \(\vec{p^{\prime}}\)) along the x-direction, by virtue of Eqs. 16, 17 and 18:

\[\begin{array}{l}F^{\mu}F_{\mu}=\frac{dp^{\mu}}{d\tau}\frac{dp_{\mu}}{d\tau}= \frac{1}{c^{2}}\left(\frac{dE}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}-\left(\frac{d\vec{p}}{ dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}=\\ =\frac{1}{c^{2}}\left(\gamma\,\frac{dE^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}+\gamma\,v_{x}\, \frac{dp_{x}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}-\left(\frac{dp_{y}^{\prime}}{ dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}-\left(\frac{dp_{z}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}- \left(\gamma\,\frac{dp_{x}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}+\gamma\,\frac{v_{x}}{c^{2} }\,\frac{dE^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}=\\ =\left[\,\frac{\gamma^{2}}{c^{2}}\left(\frac{dE^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right) ^{2}+\gamma^{2}\,\frac{v_{x}^{2}}{c^{2}}\left(\frac{dp_{x}^{\prime}}{dt^{ \prime}}\right)^{2}-\left(\frac{dp_{y}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}- \left(\frac{dp_{z}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}+2\gamma^{2}\,\frac{v_{x}} {c^{2}}\,\frac{dE^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\frac{dp_{x}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}+ \right.\\ \left.-\gamma^{2}\left(\frac{dp_{y}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}-\gamma^ {2}\,\frac{v_{x}^{2}}{c^{4}}\left(\frac{dE^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2} -2\gamma^{2}\,\frac{v_{x}}{c^{2}}\,\frac{dE^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\frac{dp_{ x}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right]=\\ =\frac{1}{c^{2}}\left(\frac{dE^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}\gamma^{2}(1- \beta^{2})-\left(\frac{dp_{x}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}\gamma^{2}(1- \beta^{2})-\left(\frac{dp_{y}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}-\left(\frac{ dp_{z}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}=\\ =\frac{1}{c^{2}}\left(\frac{dE^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}-\left(\frac{ d\vec{p}^{\prime}}{dt^{\prime}}\right)^{2}\end{array} \tag{191}\]

Alternatively, the radiated power can be expressed in terms of particle's velocity and acceleration. The ordinary force in the 4-vector force \(F^{\mu}=(\gamma\,\vec{F}\,\vec{\beta},\gamma\,\vec{F})\) is decomposed in two components, one parallel and one orthogonal to the particle's velocity, \(\vec{F}=(F_{\parallel}\), \(F_{\perp})=(\gamma^{3}m_{0}a_{\parallel}\), \(\gamma\,m_{0}a_{\perp})\). Then, Eq. 190 becomes:

[MISSING_PAGE_FAIL:167]

#### Radiation Emission in a Synchrotron

Centripetal acceleration in dipole magnets is the main source of radiation emission in a synchrotron. Since the particle's energy, diminished by radiation emission, is replenished by RF acceleration, it is convenient to calculate the radiated power per turn, assuming a constant energy on average in one turn, or \(\frac{dE}{dt}\approxeq 0\). This same condition is assumed for the single pass in a dipole (the amount of radiated power is a small fraction of the beam power). Still, the Lorentz's force determines a variation of the direction of the longitudinal momentum which is at the origin of the radiated power.

The relativistic expression of the Lorentz's force in a dipole magnet of bending radius \(R\) is \(F_{\perp}=\frac{dp_{z}}{dt}=\gamma m_{0}\frac{v_{z}^{2}}{R}\). The radiated power expressed in the laboratory frame results:

\[P_{sr}\approxeq\frac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}}\frac{2}{3}\frac{q^{2}}{m_{0}^{2}c^{ 3}}\gamma^{2}\left(\frac{d\bar{p}}{dt}\right)^{2}=\frac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}} \frac{2}{3}q^{2}c\frac{\beta^{4}\gamma^{4}}{R^{2}} \tag{7.12}\]

Owing to the strong dependence from the relativistic \(\gamma\)-factor, \(P_{sr}\propto E^{4}/m_{0}^{4}\), the emission is enhanced for light particles like leptons, compared to heavier particles like protons, ions, etc., at the _same total energy_. This explains why synchrotron light sources are electron accelerators. Radiation emitted because of centripetal acceleration is called _synchrotron radiation_. For any given total energy, the emission of synchrotron radiation is enhanced by small bending radii, i.e., strong magnetic fields (see Eq. 2.5).

The total energy per turn emitted by a single particle is [2]:

\[U_{0}=\oint\frac{P_{sr}}{\beta c}ds=\frac{q^{2}\beta^{3}\gamma^{4}}{6\pi \epsilon_{0}}\oint\frac{ds}{R(s)^{2}}\rightarrow\frac{q^{2}}{3\epsilon_{0}} \frac{\beta^{3}\gamma^{4}}{R} \tag{7.13}\]

and the last expression is for a dense isomagnetic lattice, namely, \(C=2\pi\,R_{eq}\approxeq 2\pi\,R\). In practical units for an ultra-relativistic electron:

\[U_{0}[keV]=88.45\frac{E^{4}[GeV]}{R[m]}=26.5E^{3}[GeV]B[T] \tag{7.14}\]

This typically amounts to several 100s keV in an electron synchrotron at few GeV's beam energy. In spite of its smallness compared to the nominal beam energy, it would rapidly deplenish the particles' energy after only \(\sim 10^{4}\) turns or so. This motivates the adoption of RF cavities to balance the energy loss. In practice, the total RF peak voltage is at MV level, not only to compensate for the emission of radiation, but also to maximize the RF energy acceptance. Accordingly, the beam's energy is kept constant on average in a turn by running the cavities with a phase close to the zero-crossing.

Since the emission of synchrotron radiation is incoherent, i.e., each particle emits radiation independently from the others in a bunch, the power emitted by the whole bunch in a turn is simply the sum of the emission by \(N_{b}\) particles:

\[P_{sr,b}=N_{b}\,\frac{U_{0}}{T_{0}}=\frac{U_{0}(I)}{q} \tag{7.15}\]

where \(Q=q\,N_{b}\) is the beam's total charge, and \(\langle I\rangle\) is the beam average current stored in the accelerator.

#### 7.1.5.1 Discussion: Comparison of Radiated Power

What is the power radiated by a single particle subject to either centripetal or longitudinal acceleration, for equal magnitude of the force in the two cases? Which of the two accelerations maximize the amount of radiated power at ultra-relativistic velocities?

The ratio of radiated power in the two cases is easily calculated from Eq. 7.10:

\[\left\{\begin{array}{l}P_{\parallel}=-\frac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}}\frac{2}{3} \frac{q^{2}}{c^{3}}\gamma^{6}|\vec{a}_{\parallel}|^{2}\\ \\ P_{\perp}=-\frac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}}\frac{2}{3}\frac{q^{2}}{c}\gamma^{6}\dot{ \beta}^{2}(1-\beta^{2})=-\frac{1}{4\pi\epsilon_{0}}\frac{2}{3}\frac{q^{2}}{c^{3 }}\gamma^{4}|\vec{a}_{\perp}|^{2}\end{array}\right. \tag{7.16}\]

We now impose the relativistic force, either parallel or perpendicular to the particle's velocity, to be equal in absolute value: \(F_{\parallel}=\gamma^{3}m_{0}a_{\parallel}\equiv F_{\perp}=\gamma\,m_{0}a_{\perp}\). Namely, \(a_{\perp}=\gamma^{2}a_{\parallel}\), and we find \(\frac{P_{\parallel}}{P_{\perp}}=\frac{1}{\gamma^{2}}\).

The same result is obtained by expressing the radiated power in covariant form:

\[\begin{array}{l}-F^{\mu}F_{\mu}=-\frac{\gamma^{2}}{c^{2}}(\vec{F}\cdot\vec{ u})^{2}+\gamma^{2}|\vec{F}|^{2}=\left\{\begin{array}{l}\gamma^{2}(1-\beta^{2})F_{ \parallel}^{2}=\gamma^{6}m_{0}^{2}|\vec{a}_{\parallel}|^{2}\\ \\ \gamma^{2}F_{\perp}^{2}=\gamma^{4}m_{0}^{2}|\vec{a}_{\perp}|^{2}\end{array}\right. \\ \\ \Rightarrow\frac{P_{\parallel}}{P_{\perp}}=\frac{1}{\gamma^{2}}\end{array} \tag{7.17}\]

In conclusion, when charged particles are at ultra-relativistic velocities, the radiated power is largely more stimulated by centripetal acceleration (e.g., in a dipole magnet) than by longitudinal acceleration (e.g., in a RF structure), for a comparable force in the two situations.

### 7.2 Angular Distribution

#### 7.2.1 Longitudinal Acceleration

The amount of energy radiated by a single particle in the time interval \(dt=t_{2}-t_{1}\), evaluated in the laboratory frame, is written by recalling Eq. 7.7[1, 2]:

\[\begin{array}{l}U=\int_{t_{1}}^{t_{2}}P(t)dt=\int_{t_{1}}^{t_{2}}dt\int_{ \Omega}d\Omega\,(|\vec{S}\cdot\hat{n}|R^{2})_{t^{\prime}}=\int_{t_{1}}^{t_{2} ^{\prime}}\int_{\Omega}d\Omega\,(|\vec{S}\cdot\hat{n}|R^{2})_{t^{\prime}}\frac {dt}{dt^{\prime}}dt^{\prime}=\\ \\ =\int_{t_{1}}^{t_{2}^{\prime}}dt^{\prime}\int_{\Omega}d\Omega\frac{dP(t^{ \prime})}{d\Omega}\end{array} \tag{7.18}\]

As also in Eq. 7.7, an azimuthal symmetry of the emission is assumed, and in this case \(d\Omega=2\pi\,\sin\theta d\theta\). By virtue of Eq. 7.3, the power angular distribution evaluated at the retarded time is:

\[\begin{array}{l}\frac{dP(t^{\prime})}{d\Omega}=c\epsilon_{0}\left(\frac{q}{ 4\pi\epsilon_{0}}\right)^{2}\frac{(1-\hat{n}\hat{n})_{t^{\prime}}}{(1-\hat{n} \hat{n})_{t^{\prime}}^{\prime}}\frac{[\hat{n}\times[(\hat{n}-\hat{n})\times \hat{\hat{\beta}}]]_{t^{\prime}}^{2}}{c^{2}R^{2}}R^{2}=\\ \\ =\frac{q^{2}}{16\pi^{2}c\epsilon_{0}}\frac{1}{(1-\beta\cos\theta)_{t^{\prime}}^ {2}}\{\hat{n}\times[(\hat{n}-\hat{\beta})\times\hat{\hat{\beta}}]\}_{t^{ \prime}}^{2}\end{array} \tag{7.19}\]When the acceleration is parallel to the particle's velocity, such as in a RF structure, the cross product in Eq. 7.19 can be re-written as \(\hat{n}\times[(\hat{n}-\vec{\beta})\times\dot{\vec{\beta}}]=\hat{n}\times[(\hat{n} \times\dot{\vec{\beta}})-(\vec{\beta}\times\dot{\vec{\beta}})]=\hat{n}\hat{\beta}\sin\theta\), and Eq. 7.19 becomes:

\[\frac{dP(t^{\prime})}{d\Omega}=\frac{q^{2}}{16\pi^{2}c\epsilon_{0}}\left[\frac {\hat{\beta}^{2}\sin^{2}\theta}{(1-\beta\cos\theta)^{5}}\right]_{t^{\prime}} \tag{7.20}\]

We draw the following observations.

* In the non-relativistic limit \(\beta\to 0\), the power angular distribution reduces to the classical dipolar emission, as shown in Fig. 7.2-top left. This has maximum (null) intensity along the direction normal (parallel) to the velocity. The two "lobes" of emission are symmetric in the z-direction. Integrated over \(\theta\in[0,\pi\,]\), the radiated power reduces to Larmor's formula in Eq. 7.7.
* In the ultra-relativistic limit \(\beta\to 1\), the maximum of the angular power density is found by imposing \(\frac{d}{d\theta}\frac{dP}{d\Omega}\equiv 0\), which translates into \(\sin\theta(1-\cos\theta)^{4}[2\cos\theta(1-\beta\cos\theta)-5\beta\sin^{2} \theta]=0\). This gives either \(\theta=0\) (null emission) or, by expanding the square brackets for \(\theta\ll 1\) (this assumption will be verified _a posteriori_) and using \(\beta=\sqrt{1-\frac{1}{\gamma^{2}}}\approx 1-\frac{1}{2\gamma^{2}}\), it results \(\theta\approx\pm\frac{1}{2\gamma}\).

Particle's motion at large \(\gamma\)'s confirms that the emission is at very small angles from the direction of motion. Namely, the two "lobes", characteristic of dipolar emission in the non-relativistic case, are boosted forward and close to the z-axis, in proportion to the beam's energy, as shown in Fig. 7.2-top right. Since the emission is null exactly on-axis, each lobe has to have a characteristic width \(\sigma_{\theta}\approx\frac{1}{\gamma}\).

By virtue of the generic nature of longitudinal acceleration considered so far, the power angular distribution in Eq. 7.20 applies to RF acceleration as well as to longitudinal deceleration, provided for example by a metallic foil on the beam's path. Indeed, this process is used to relate the beam particles' spatio-angular and/or energy distribution to the angular distribution of the emitted radiation. This is named "optical transition radiation" if the frequency range is close to that of visible light.

Figure 7.2: Top view of the radiation power angular distribution for acceleration parallel (top) and normal (bottom) to the charged particle’s velocity, for non-relativistic velocity or in the particle’s reference frame (left), and for ultra-relativistic velocity in the observer’s reference frame (right)

#### Centripetal Acceleration

When the acceleration is normal to the particle's instantaneous velocity, such as in a dipole magnet, the cross product in Eq. 7.19 becomes \(\hat{n}\times[(\hat{n}\times\dot{\hat{\beta}})-(\vec{\beta}\times\dot{\vec{\beta} })]=\hat{n}\times(\dot{\beta}\cos\theta-\dot{\beta}\beta)\hat{k}=\hat{j}\dot{ \beta}(\cos\theta-\beta)\). Equation 7.19 gives [1, 2]:

\[\frac{dP(t^{\prime})}{d\Omega}=\frac{q^{2}}{16\pi^{2}c\epsilon_{0}}\left[\frac {\dot{\beta}^{2}(\cos\theta-\beta)^{2}}{(1-\beta\cos\theta)^{5}}\right]_{t^{ \prime}} \tag{7.21}\]

The term in square brackets can be re-written by expanding the numerator and by isolating the term \((1-\beta\cos\theta)^{2}\). This simplifies with the denominator to give:

\[\frac{dP(t^{\prime})}{d\Omega}=\frac{q^{2}}{16\pi^{2}c\epsilon_{0}}\left[ \frac{\dot{\beta}^{2}}{(1-\beta\cos\theta)^{3}}\right]_{t^{\prime}}\left[1- \frac{(1-\beta^{2})\sin^{2}\theta}{(1-\beta\cos\theta)^{2}}\right]_{t^{\prime }}\rightarrow\ \frac{q^{2}}{16\pi^{2}c\epsilon_{0}}\left[\frac{\dot{\beta}^{2}}{(1-\beta \cos\theta)^{3}}\right]_{t^{\prime}}, \tag{7.22}\]

and the limit is taken for \(\beta\to 1\).

At small angles, the angular power density goes like \(\frac{dP}{d\Omega}\propto(1-\beta\cos\theta)^{-3}\approx(1-\beta+\beta\frac{ \theta^{2}}{2})^{-3}\approx\frac{8}{\left(\theta^{2}+\frac{1}{\nu^{2}}\right) ^{3}}\). Radiation emission from centripetal acceleration is maximum on-axis (\(\theta=0\)), and it shrinks to 8-fold smaller value at the typical aperture \(\theta=\pm\frac{1}{\nu}\). This is illustrated in Fig. 7.2-bottom plots, for emission in the particle's rest frame and at relativistic motion in the laboratory frame (see also Fig. 1.8).

By virtue of the azimuthal symmetry of emission, an observer at large distance form the source receives light at the characteristic angle \(\theta=1/\gamma\) in the vertical plane. In the horizontal plane, however, the angular collimation characteristic of the instantaneous emission is smeared because particles moving along the circular orbit emit radiation at _any_ point tangent to the curved path. For this reason, synchrotron radiation from a dipole magnet is typically selected with slits in the horizontal plane to limit the effective cone of emission to \(1/\gamma\) or so (see later Fig. 10.6).

### 7.3 Spectral Distribution

#### Critical Frequency

The spectral distribution of synchrotron radiation is derived on the basis of qualitative considerations. Still, all the essential features are kept, and exact results are reported for completeness [2, 3]. The spectral bandwidth is first estimated as the inverse of the temporal duration of the radiation pulse emitted along an arc of circumference in a dipole magnet. The time interval is calculated with reference to Fig. 7.3. Since most of the radiation flux is contained in an angular cone of aperture \(1/\gamma\), a point-like observer receives light only from a portion of the curved path corresponding to the total angle \(2/\gamma\). In particular, the first photon is emitted at point A, and it takes the time \(\delta t_{1}=2\frac{\sin(1/\gamma)}{c}\) along the straight line to reach the observer. The last photon is emitted at point B, after the electron has traveled along the curved path in a time interval \(\delta t_{2}=\frac{2R/\gamma}{\beta c}\). Thus, the duration of the radiation pulse for \(\gamma\gg 1\) is:\[\Delta t = \delta t_{2}-\delta t_{1}=\frac{2R}{c}\left[\frac{1}{\beta\gamma}- \sin\left(\frac{1}{\gamma}\right)\right]\approxeq\frac{2R}{c\gamma}\left(\frac{ 1}{\beta}-1\right)=\frac{2R}{c\gamma}\left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{1-\frac{1}{\gamma^{ 2}}}}-1\right)\approxeq\] \[\approxeq\frac{2R}{c\gamma}\left(1+\frac{1}{2\gamma^{2}}-1\right) =\frac{R}{c\gamma^{3}}\sim\frac{T_{0}}{\gamma^{3}}\]

with \(T_{0}\) the revolution period.

Since the emission is incoherent (each particle emits independently from all other particles), and since we assume no interference of the emitted waves (radiation emission is continuous along the arc length, and the absence of periodicity of the magnetic field along it does not imply any spectral filtering), the spectral bandwidth is expected to be wide, i.e., \(\Delta\omega/\omega_{c}\approx 1\). The characteristic frequency at which we expect maximum intensity is approximately \(\omega_{c}\approx\Delta\omega\approx\frac{1}{\Delta t}\approx\frac{c\gamma^{3} }{R}\).

This can also be understood, in the case of periodic motion, considering that the observer (detector) will receive a radiation pulse every time the particle passes in correspondence of the arc length \(AB\)[4]. In the frequency domain, the spectral distribution of the pulse is composed of the fundamental (revolution) frequency and of its harmonics. However, a frequency cutoff \(\omega_{c}\) is present at high harmonics because of the finite pulse duration, which is of the order of \(\omega_{c}\approx\frac{1}{\Delta t}\approx\frac{c\gamma^{3}}{R}\).

Thus, we expect the single particle's emission of synchrotron radiation be a discrete spectrum of closely spaced lines up to \(\omega_{c}\). In reality, each spectral line is broadened by the oscillations of many electrons around the main orbit, fluctuations in their kinetic energy, and the statistical nature of emission. All these effects result in a _continuous, broad_ spectrum with the aforementioned high frequency cutoff.

In the literature, the "critical" or "cutoff" frequency of synchrotron radiation is defined as \(\omega_{c}=\frac{3}{2}\frac{c\gamma^{3}}{R}\). This has two peculiar properties: (i) it defines the high frequency cutoff at which the radiation flux starts dropping fast, and (ii) it exactly halves the pulse energy spectral distribution. The corresponding photon energy in practical units is:

Figure 3: Top view of synchrotron radiation emission in a dipole magnet, in a characteristic angular cone of amplitude \(\theta=1/\gamma\). The first photon reaching the observer is emitted at point A, the last photon at point B. The bending angle is \(2/\gamma\)

\[u_{c}[keV] =\hbar\omega_{c}=\frac{3}{4\pi}\frac{hc}{e}\left(\frac{E[GeV]}{mc^{2} [GeV]}\right)^{3}\,\frac{0.3B[T]}{p_{z}[GeV/c]}= \tag{7.24}\] \[=2.218\frac{E^{3}[GeV]}{R[m]}=0.665E^{2}[GeV]B[T]\]

For typical electron beam energies of synchrotron light sources in the range \(\sim 1-10\) GeV and circumferences long \(\sim\)0.1 \(-\) 1 km, the critical photon energy is in x-rays, and the spectrum extends down to infrared photon energies.

#### Universal Function

The time integral of the power radiated in a dipole magnet in Eq. 7.19 provides the radiated energy angular distribution. Since the e.m. power is proportional to the squared modulus of the electric field, the Plancherel theorem (the integral of a function's squared modulus is equal to the integral of the squared modulus of its frequency spectrum) allows us to pass from the time domain to the frequency domain of the radiated energy. Moreover, since the frequency of the e.m. field is proportional to the photon energy, the spectral distribution of the radiated energy is obtained eventually [2, 3]:

\[\frac{dU}{d\Omega}=\int_{-\infty}^{+\infty}\frac{dP}{d\Omega}dt=c\epsilon_{0} \int_{-\infty}^{+\infty}|R\vec{E}(t)|^{2}dt=2c\epsilon_{0}\int_{0}^{+\infty}|R \vec{E}(\omega)|^{2}d\omega\]

\[\Rightarrow\frac{dU}{d\omega}=2c\epsilon_{0}\int_{\Omega}|R\vec{E}(\omega)|^{ 2}d\Omega=\frac{U_{0}}{\omega_{c}}S\left(\frac{\omega}{\omega_{c}}\right), \tag{7.25}\]

\[S(x)=\frac{9\sqrt{3}}{8\pi}x\int_{x}^{\infty}K_{5/3}(x^{\prime})dx^{\prime}\]

\(K_{5/3}(x)\) is the modified Bessel function and \(S(\omega/\omega_{c})\) is called _universal function_ or normalized spectrum of synchrotron radiation. It is calculated by integrating the single particle's radiated energy distribution over the whole solid angle of emission. It is illustrated in Fig. 7.4, normalized to its maximum value 0.57. As mentioned above, it satisfies \(\int_{0}^{1}S(u)du=\int_{1}^{\infty}S(u)du=0.5\). We also find that the full-width half-maximum (fwhm) bandwidth is \(\Delta\omega\approx\omega_{c}\), and that, in fact, no radiation is emitted above \(\approx\)4\(\omega_{c}\).

The universal function allows us to calculate the maximum of the power spectral density emitted by a particle beam of total charge \(Q_{b}=N_{b}q\) in one turn:

\[\left(\frac{dP_{tot}}{d\omega}\right)_{max}[W\cdot sec]=N_{b}\frac{U_{0}}{T_{ 0}}\frac{\hat{S}}{\omega_{c}}=0.57\frac{N_{b}P_{0}}{\omega_{c}}=1.5\cdot 10^{17 }E[GeV]\langle I\rangle[mA] \tag{7.26}\]

and the expression in practical units makes use of Eqs. 7.14 and 7.24.

For completeness, the expression of the characteristic angle of emission from the radiation frequency is reported [6]. Since \(\omega_{c}\sim\gamma^{3}\sim\theta^{-3}\), we infer:

\[\frac{\theta_{c}}{\theta}\approx\left(\frac{\omega_{c}}{\omega}\right)^{1/3} \Rightarrow\ \ \theta_{c}\approx\theta\left(\frac{\omega_{c}}{\omega}\right)^{1/3}\approx \frac{1}{\gamma}\left(\frac{\omega_{c}}{\omega}\right)^{1/3} \tag{7.27}\]The characteristic angle \(\theta_{c}\) becomes smaller than \(1/\gamma\) at \(\omega>\omega_{c}\). The angular-spectral dependence of the universal function shows that synchrotron radiation emission is negligible for \(\omega\gg\omega_{c}\) and \(\theta\gg\theta_{c}\). At very high frequencies, the residual emission is basically on-axis by virtue of extremely small values of \(\theta_{c}\).

In summary:

* the spectral distribution of synchrotron radiation is broadband;
* the spectral intensity falls off exponentially for \(\omega>\omega_{c}\), while it decreases slowly for \(\omega<\omega_{c}\);
* at low frequencies, it is largely independent from the photons' energy, therefore from the electrons' energy, and it is mainly determined by the average current stored in the ring;
* the maximum photon energy is few times the critical energy.

#### Intensity

The universal function is a powerful tool to retrieve meaningful statistical properties of the photon distribution [2, 5]. As an example, the number of photons emitted per second at the energy \(u\) by a single electron, on average in one turn, in the unit photon energy interval \(du\), can be calculated as:

\[\begin{array}{l}\frac{dn(\epsilon)}{dt}du=\frac{1}{T_{0}}\frac{dU}{d\omega} \frac{1}{\hbar\omega}d\omega\\ \\ \Rightarrow\dot{n}=\frac{U_{0}}{T_{0}}\frac{S}{\omega_{c}}\frac{1}{\hbar^{2} \omega}=\frac{U_{0}}{T_{0}}\frac{1}{u_{c}^{2}}\frac{S(\omega/\omega_{c})}{( \omega/\omega_{c})}=\frac{P_{0}}{u_{c}^{2}}\frac{S(x)}{x}\end{array} \tag{7.28}\]

Figure 7.4: Universal function of synchrotron radiation, normalized to its maximum value \(S_{max}=S(0.3)=0.57\), in linear (left) and log-log scale. \(x=\omega/\omega_{c}\)

This result is used to calculate the number of photons per second or meter, integrated over the whole spectral range:

\[\begin{array}{l}\frac{dN}{dt}=\int_{0}^{\infty}\dot{n}(u)du=\frac{15\sqrt{3}}{8} \frac{P_{0}}{u_{c}}=\frac{15\sqrt{3}}{8}\frac{26.5E^{3}[GeV]B[T]}{2.218E^{2}[GeV] B[T]}\frac{1}{T_{0}}=\\ \\ =\frac{15\sqrt{3}}{8}\frac{2.65}{2.218}E[GeV]\frac{0.3}{2\pi}\frac{B[T]c}{p_{z} [GeV/c]}\approx 6.2cB[T]\quad[photons/sec]\\ \\ \frac{dN}{ds}\approx\frac{dN}{cdt}\approxeq 6.2B[T]\quad\quad[photons/m]\end{array} \tag{7.29}\]

Hence, the total number of photons per second per unit angle in the horizontal plane, summed over the total beam charge, emitted on average in one turn, is:

\[\begin{array}{l}\frac{d^{2}N_{tot}}{dtdt\theta}\approx\frac{dN}{dt}\frac{(I) }{e}\frac{R}{c}=6.2\frac{p_{z}[GeV/c]}{0.3R}\frac{R}{e}\langle I\rangle=1.3 \cdot 10^{17}E[GeV]\langle I\rangle[A]\quad\quad[\frac{photons}{sec\cdot mrad- hor.}]\end{array} \tag{7.30}\]

The total spectro-angular intensity can be calculated by differentiating the bottom line of Eq. 7.25 by \(d\Omega\), times the number of beam particles \(N_{b}\):

\[\begin{array}{l}\frac{d^{3}N_{tot}(\omega)}{dtdt\Omega d\omega}=\frac{1}{ \hbar\omega}\frac{N_{b}}{T_{0}}\frac{d^{2}U(\omega)}{d\omega d\Omega}=\frac{2 c\epsilon_{0}}{\hbar\omega}\frac{N_{b}}{T_{0}}R^{2}|\vec{E}(\omega)|^{2}\\ \\ \Rightarrow\frac{d^{3}N_{tot}(\omega)}{dtdt\theta d\omega/\omega}=2.457\cdot 1 0^{13}E[GeV]\langle I\rangle[A]S(\omega/\omega_{c})\quad\left[\frac{photons }{sec\cdot mrad-hor.\cdot 0.1\%bw}\right]\end{array} \tag{7.31}\]

Equation 7.29 can also be used to quantify the statistical momenta of the photon energy distribution, for example the average and the root mean square photon energy:

\[\begin{array}{l}\langle u\rangle=\frac{1}{N}\int_{0}^{\infty}u\dot{n}(u)du= \frac{P}{N}=\frac{8}{15\sqrt{3}}u_{c}\\ \\ \langle u^{2}\rangle=\frac{1}{N}\int_{0}^{\infty}u^{2}\dot{n}(u)du=\frac{8}{15 \sqrt{3}}u_{c}^{2}\int_{0}^{\infty}x\,S(s)dx=\frac{11}{27}u_{c}^{2}\end{array} \tag{7.32}\]

#### Polarization

The electric field vector of synchrotron radiation is seen to oscillate in the bending plane from an observer placed exactly on that plane. The corresponding polarization is therefore linear horizontal. However, the electric field observed off-axis, of not negligible intensity within vertical angles \(\pm 1/\gamma\), shows also a vertical component, i.e., the off-axis polarization is elliptical. Since the field vector is seen to rotate, say, clock-wise above the plane and counter-clock-wise below it, the elliptical polarization is, respectively, left- and right-handed.

The contribution of the distinct horizontal and vertical polarization to the single particle radiated power can therefore be discriminated by means of the vertical opening angle. Without a derivation [4, 6], we report for completeness the integral of Eq. 7.19 over all horizontal angles of emission, so keeping the dependence of the emitted power from the vertical angle \(\psi\) only:

\[\frac{dP}{d\psi}=\int\frac{dP}{d\Omega}\sin\theta d\theta=P_{0}\frac{21}{32} \frac{\gamma}{(1+\gamma^{2}\psi^{2})^{5/2}}\left[1+\frac{5}{7}\frac{\gamma^{2} \psi^{2}}{1+\gamma^{2}\psi^{2}}\right] \tag{7.33}\]

The amount of power associated to the horizontal and vertical polarization is, respectively, \(P_{\sigma}=\frac{7}{8}P_{0}\) and \(P_{\pi}=\frac{1}{8}P_{0}\).

## References

* (1) J.D. Jackson, _Classical Electrodynamics_, 3rd edn. (Wiley, New York 1999). Chapter 14
* (2) R.P. Walker, Synchrotron radiation, in _Proceedings of CERN Accelerators School: 5th General Accelerators Physics Course_, CERN 94-01, vol. I, ed. by S. Turner (Geneva, Switzerland, 1994), pp. 437-460
* (3) K.-J., Kim, Characteristics of synchrotron radiation. AIP Conf. Proc. **184**, 565-632 (1989)
* (4) G. Margaritondo, A. Primer, Synchrotron radiation. J. Synchr. Rad. **2**, 148-154; vol. 1994, ed. by S. Turner (Geneva, Switzerland, 1995), pp. 437-460
* (5) A. Balerna, S. Mobilio, _Introduction to Synchrotron Radiation_, in _Synchrotron Radiation_, ed. by S. Mobilio et al., (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2015) pp. 3-28 (ed. by S. Turner, Geneva, Switzerland, 1994), pp. 437-460
* (6) A. Hofmann, Characteristics of synchrotron radiation, in _Proceedings of CERN Accelerator School: Synchrotron Radiation and Free Electron Lasers, CERN 98-04_, ed. by S. Turner (Geneva, Switzerland, 1998), pp. 1-44

