## Solutions for Chap. 1

**1.1** We start with the total energy and solve for the momentum \(cp=\sqrt{E^{2}-\left(mc^{2}\right)^{2}}=mc^{2}\sqrt{\gamma^{2}-1}=\gamma mc^{2} \sqrt{1-1/\gamma^{2}}=\beta\left(E_{\mathrm{kin}}+mc^{2}\right).\) In terms of kinetic energy \(cp=\sqrt{\left(E_{\mathrm{kin}}+mc^{2}\right)^{2}-\left(mc^{2}\right)^{2}}= \sqrt{E_{\mathrm{kin}}^{2}+2mc^{2}E_{\mathrm{kin}}}\) and the kinetic energy is \(E_{\mathrm{kin}}=E-mc^{2}=mc^{2}\left(\gamma-1\right).\) For very large energies we get with \(\gamma\gg 1\) for the momentum \(cp\approx E\) and for the kinetic energy \(E_{\mathrm{kin}}\approx E.\) For \(\beta\ll 1\) the kinetic energy is with \(\gamma-1\approx\frac{1}{2}\beta^{2}\) just \(E_{\mathrm{kin}}=\frac{1}{2}mv^{2}.\) The non-relativistic momentum is from \(p=\frac{1}{c}\beta\left(E_{\mathrm{kin}}+mc^{2}\right)\approx\beta mc=mv.\)

**1.2** From Maxwell's equations we have \(\boldsymbol{\nabla}\boldsymbol{E}=\frac{1}{\epsilon_{0}}\rho.\) We integrate this over a cylindrical volume including part or all of the charge and get with Gauss's Integral Theorem: \(\int\boldsymbol{\nabla}\boldsymbol{E}\mathrm{d}V=\oint\boldsymbol{E}\mathrm{d }a=E_{r}2\pi rL,\) where \(L\) is the length of the cylindrical beam considered. The electrical field has for symmetry reasons only a radial component. The r.h.s. of Maxwell's equation is then the integral over the volume contained within the surface used on the l.h.s. \(\frac{1}{\epsilon_{0}}\int\rho\mathrm{d}V=\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{0}}\pi r^{2}L\) for \(\left(r<R\right)\) and \(\frac{\rho}{2\epsilon_{0}}\pi R^{2}L\) for \(\left(r>R\right)\), and the radial electrical field component is \(E_{r}=\frac{\rho}{2\epsilon_{0}}r\) for \(\left(r<R\right)\) and \(\frac{\rho}{2\epsilon_{0}}\frac{R^{2}}{r}\) for \(\left(r>R\right).\) Similarly we get for the magnetic field after integration \(\int\boldsymbol{\nabla}\times\boldsymbol{B}\mathrm{d}V=\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{ 0}}\int\boldsymbol{\mathrm{d}}V=\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{0}}\beta\pi r^{2}L\) for \(\left(r<R\right)\) and \(\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{0}}\beta\pi R^{2}L\) for \(\left(r>R\right).\) Since \(\boldsymbol{v=}\left(0,0,v_{z}\right)\), symmetry restricts the r.h.s. to only a \(z\)-component and the field to only a \(\varphi\)-component. We get \(\int\boldsymbol{\nabla}\times\boldsymbol{B}\mathrm{d}V=\int\frac{\partial \boldsymbol{B}_{\varphi}}{\partial r}\mathrm{d}V=B_{\varphi}L2\pi r.\) Solving for the field, we get \(B_{\varphi}=\frac{1}{2}\mu_{0}\rho\beta r\) for \(\left(r<R\right)\) and \(\frac{1}{2}\mu_{0}\rho\beta\frac{R^{2}}{r}\) for \(\left(r>R\right)\).

**1.3** We integrate Maxwell's equation \(\boldsymbol{\nabla}\boldsymbol{E=}\frac{\rho\left(r\right)}{\epsilon_{0}}\) over a cylindrical volume concentric to the beam. The l.h.s. becomes \(\int\boldsymbol{\nabla}\boldsymbol{E}\mathrm{d}V=\oint\boldsymbol{E}\mathrm{d }a=E_{r}2\pi rL,\) where \(\mathrm{d}a\) is an element of the co-centric cylindrical surface and \(L\) an arbitrary length along the beam axis. Since an infinitely long beam is assumed, only a radialelectric field component exists. The r.h.s. is integrated over the same cylinder \(2\pi\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{0}}L\int_{0}^{r}\exp\left(-\frac{\vec{r}^{2}}{2\sigma^ {2}}\right)\vec{r}\mathrm{d}\vec{r}\ =\ 2\pi\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{0}}L\sigma^{2}\left[1-\exp\left(-\frac{r^{2}}{2 \sigma^{2}}\right)\right]\) and the radial electric field component is finally \(E_{r}\ =\ \frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{0}}\frac{\sigma^{2}}{r}\left[1-\exp\left(-\frac{r^{2}}{2 \sigma^{2}}\right)\right]\). In a similar way the magnetic field can be obtained. Only the azimuthal component is non-zero given by \(B_{\varphi}=\mu_{0}\rho\beta\frac{\sigma^{2}}{r}\left[1-\exp\left(-\frac{r^{2} }{2\sigma^{2}}\right)\right]\). The fields vanish for \(r\to 0\) and for \(r=\sigma\) are \(E_{r}\left(\sigma\right)=\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_{0}}\sigma\left[1-\exp\left(- \frac{1}{2}\right)\right]\) and \(B_{\varphi}\left(\sigma\right)=\mu_{0}\rho\beta\sigma\left[1-\exp\left(- \frac{1}{2}\right)\right].\)

**1.4** The circulating beam current is defined by \(i=enf_{\mathrm{rev}}=env/C\) where \(n\) is the number of particles circulating, \(f_{\mathrm{rev}}\) is the revolution frequency, \(v\) the particle velocity and \(C\) the accelerator circumference. The number of particles representing a current of 1A are: \(n=iC/\left(Ev\right)=6.2458\cdot 10^{12}\). The ejected beam resembles a pulse with a pulse current of 1A since particles are assumed to be distributed uniformly. The pulse length is given by the revolution time \(\tau=\frac{C}{c\beta}=1.0007\,\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolMicro s}\) assuming \(\beta\approx 1\). The synchrotron produces ten pulses of \(1.0007\,\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolMicro s}\) duration and at a pulse current of 1A. The average beam current is therefore \(i_{\mathrm{avg}}=10\cdot\tau\cdot 1\)A\(=10\,\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolMicro u}\).

**1.5** The bending radius \(\rho\) of a particle's path due to a force \(F\) is given by the equality of this force with the centrifugal force. \(\frac{\gamma mv^{2}}{\rho}=F\) or \(\rho=\beta^{2}\gamma mc^{2}/F\). The gravitational force is \(F=f\frac{mM}{R^{2}}=1.6397\cdot 10^{-26}\,\mathrm{kg}\) m s\({}^{-2}\),where the proton mass \(m_{\mathrm{p}}=1.67262\cdot 10^{-27}\,\mathrm{kg}\), the mass of earth \(M=5.98\cdot 10^{24}\,\mathrm{kg}\), and the earth's radius \(R=6.380\cdot 10^{6}\,\mathrm{m}\). Numerically, the gravitational constant is \(f=6.67259\cdot 10^{-11}\,\mathrm{m}^{3}\) kg\({}^{-1}\)s\({}^{-2}\) and for a \(1\,\mathrm{eV}\) proton (\(\gamma=1+\frac{1}{0.938\cdot 10^{9}}=1+1.0661\cdot 10^{-9}\)) the velocity \(\beta\approx\sqrt{\frac{2E_{\mathrm{kin}}}{mc^{2}}}=4.6175\cdot 10^{-5}\). With these parameters, the bending radius is \(\rho=1.955\cdot 10^{7}\,\mathrm{m}\) and therefore negligible compared to any bending radius occurring in a realistic beam transport. Equivalent electromagnetic fields can be derived from the Lorentz equation. The electrical field equivalent to the gravitational force is \(E_{\mathrm{el}}=F/e=1.023\cdot 10^{-7}\,\mathrm{V/m}\) and the corresponding magnetic field is \(B=F/\left(ec\beta\right)=7.393\cdot 10^{-12}\,\mathrm{T}\). The ratio of electrical to magnetic field is \(13,837\). For an intergalactic \(10\,\mathrm{TeV}\) proton the gravitational force is the same and therefore the bending radius is increased by the increase in the factor \(\beta^{2}\gamma=4.696\cdot 10^{9}\) and the bending radius is \(\rho=9.18\cdot 10^{10}\,\mathrm{km}\). The required electrical field to bend the same does not depend on the particle energy, while the required magnetic field scales inversely proportional to \(\beta\) and is therefore reduced to \(B=3.414\cdot 10^{-16}\,\mathrm{T}\). The field ratio finally has changed from \(13,837\) to \(2.996\cdot 10^{8}=c\) making the magnetic field the more efficient field to bend relativistic particles. This is indeed a small field, actually about a million times smaller than intergalactic magnetic fields of some \(10^{-10}\,\mathrm{T}\). Cosmic rays therefore are more affected by intergalactic magnetic fields than by gravitational field.

**1.6** The fields at the surface of the beam are \(E_{r}=\frac{\rho}{2\epsilon_{0}}R\) and \(B_{\varphi}=\frac{1}{2}\mu_{0}\rho\beta R\). The charge density for the cylindrical slug is \(\rho=e\frac{n}{\pi R^{2}\ell}=1.275\cdot 10^{7}\,\mathrm{C/m^{3}}\). The electrical field on the surface of the beam is then (\(\beta\approx 1\)) \(E_{r}=\frac{\rho}{2\epsilon_{0}}R=1.44\cdot 10^{11}\,\mathrm{V/m}\) and the magnetic field is \(B_{\varphi}=\frac{1}{2}\mu_{0}\rho\beta R=480\,\mathrm{T}\). The peak electrical current is defined by \(i=Q/\tau\), where \(Q=e\cdot 10^{10}\) is the total charge, and \(\tau\) is the duration of the current pulse \(\tau=\frac{1}{\beta c}=3.3356\cdot 10^{-12}\) s. The peak current is then \(I=480.33\) A. Two particle beams either attract or repel each other depending on whether we use an \(\mathrm{e}^{+}\)-\(\mathrm{e}^{-}\)-system or an \(\mathrm{e}^{-}\)-\(\mathrm{e}^{-}\) or \(\mathrm{e}^{+}\)-\(\mathrm{e}^{+}\)-system. For \(\gamma\gg 1\) the forces due to electrical and magnetic field are the same and act along a line including the particle in one beam and the center of charge of the other beam. The longitudinal forces cancel as both beams pass each other and the radial forces are \(F_{r}=e\frac{\rho\beta}{2\epsilon_{0}}\frac{R^{2}}{r}\), where now \(r=10\,\mu\)m. From problem 1.5 we have for the curvature \(F/\left(\gamma mv^{2}\right)\) and the deflection angle is then \(\theta=\frac{2F\ell}{\gamma mv^{2}}=1.152\cdot 10^{-5}\) rad. This deflection is significant and can be used as a diagnostic means to probe the closeness of both beams which eventually must be steered to collide head-on.

**1.7** Plane waves can be expressed by \(\mathbf{a=a}_{0}\exp\left[\mathrm{i}\left(\omega-\mathbf{kr}\right)\right]\), where the wave propagation vector \(\mathbf{k}=k\mathbf{n}\), \(k=\omega/c\) and \(\mathbf{n}\) the unit vector in the direction of wave propagation. Applied to the fields \(\left(\mathbf{E,B}\right)\) and using Amperes law \(\mathbf{\nabla}\times\mathbf{E}=-\frac{\partial\mathbf{B}}{\partial t}\), we get on the l.h.s. \(\mathbf{\nabla}\times\mathbf{E=\nabla\exp\left[\mathrm{i}\left(\omega-\mathbf{kr}\right) \right]\times E_{0}=\mathrm{i}\mathbf{\nabla}\left(\mathbf{kr}\right)\times E=\mathrm{ i}k\mathbf{\nabla}\left(\mathbf{nr}\right)\times E=\mathrm{i}k\left(\mathbf{n}\times\mathbf{E}\right)\) The r.h.s. is \(-\frac{\partial\mathbf{B}}{\partial t}=\mathrm{i}\omega\mathbf{B}\). Equating both sides gives finally \(\mathbf{n\times E=cB}\).

**1.8** We multiply two 4-vectors \(\vec{a}\) and \(\vec{b}\) and apply a Lorentz transformation:

\[\vec{\mathbf{a}}^{*}\vec{\mathbf{b}}^{*} = a_{1}^{*}b_{1}^{*}+a_{2}^{*}b_{2}^{*}+a_{3}^{*}b_{3}^{*}-a_{4}^{ *}b_{4}^{*}\] \[= a_{1}b_{1}+a_{2}b_{2}+\gamma^{2}\left(a_{3}-\beta a_{4}\right) \left(b_{3}-\beta b_{4}\right)-\gamma^{2}\left(\beta a_{3}-a_{4}\right)\left( \beta b_{3}-b_{4}\right)\] \[= a_{1}b_{1}+a_{2}b_{2}+\underbrace{\gamma^{2}\left(1-\beta^{2} \right)}_{=1}a_{3}b_{3}-\underbrace{\gamma^{2}\left(1-\beta^{2}\right)}_{=1} a_{4}b_{4}\] \[= a_{1}b_{1}+a_{2}b_{2}+a_{3}b_{3}-a_{4}b_{4}\]

**1.9** The 4-acceleration \(\vec{\mathbf{a=}}\gamma^{2}\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}\vec{\mathbf{z}}}{\mathrm{d}t^{2}}+ \vec{\mathbf{v}}\frac{\chi^{4}}{c^{2}}\left(\mathbf{v}\mathbf{a}\right)\) or in component form \(\vec{\mathbf{a=}}\left(\vec{a}_{x},\vec{a}_{y},\vec{a}_{z},\mathrm{i}\vec{a}_{t}\right)\) we get \(\vec{a}_{x}=\gamma^{2}a_{x}+\gamma^{4}\beta_{x}\left(\mathbf{\beta a}\right),\vec {a}_{y}=\ldots,\vec{a}_{z}=\ldots,\vec{a}_{t}=\gamma^{4}\left(\mathbf{\beta a} \right),\) where \(\mathbf{a}\) is the ordinary acceleration. The other components can be obtained in a similar way. Experimental verification through, for example, observation of synchrotron radiation parameters.

**1.10** We formulate in laboratory frame the 4-vectors before and after scattering. To describe electron and photons we use the 4-velocity \(\vec{u}=\left(\gamma,\gamma\mathbf{u}\right)\) with \(\mathbf{u}=\mathbf{v}/c\) and energy-momentum 4-vector \(c\vec{k}=\left(\omega,c\mathbf{k}\right).\) In the lab frame \(\vec{u}_{\mathrm{L}}=\left(\gamma,\gamma u_{\mathrm{L}}\vec{z}\right)\) and \(c\vec{k}_{\mathrm{L}}=\left(\omega_{\mathrm{L}},-\omega_{\mathrm{L}}\vec{z}\right)\) where \(\vec{z}\) is a unit vector in the direction of photon motion. We assume both the electron and photons to travel along the \(z\)-axis. After scattering, \(\vec{u}_{\mathrm{L}}=\left(\gamma,\gamma u_{\mathrm{L}}\vec{z}\right)\) and \(c\vec{k}_{\mathrm{L}}=\left(\omega_{x},\omega_{\mathrm{L}}\vec{z}\right)\), where \(\omega_{x}\) is the frequency of the outgoing photon. Here, we have assumed that the photon energy is much less than the electron energy. The product of both 4-vectors is Lorentz invariant and is therefore the same before and after scattering, or \(\omega_{\mathrm{L}}\left(1+u_{\mathrm{L}}\right)=\omega_{\mathrm{J}}\left(1-u_{ \mathrm{L}}\right)\) and solving for the scattered frequency \(\omega_{\mathrm{J}}=\omega_{\mathrm{L}}\frac{1+u_{\mathrm{L}}}{1-u_{\mathrm{L} }}\approx 4\omega_{\mathrm{L}}\gamma^{2}\) where we made use of \(\gamma^{-2}=1-u_{\mathrm{L}}^{2}\) and \(u_{\mathrm{L}}\approx 1\).

**1.11** Here, the only difference to problem 1.10 is that the undulator field does not move, or that \(c\vec{k}=(\omega_{u},0)\), where \(\omega_{u}=2\pi c/\lambda_{u}\) and \(\tilde{u}_{\rm L}=\left(\gamma,\gamma u_{\rm L}z\right)\). After scattering \(c\tilde{k}_{\rm L}=\left(\omega_{\chi},\omega_{\chi}z\right)\) and \(\tilde{u}_{\rm L}=\left(\gamma,\gamma u_{\rm L}z\right)\) as in problem 1.10. Equating again the Lorentz invariant products gives \(\omega_{u}=\omega_{\chi}\left(1-u_{\rm L}\right)\) or \(\omega_{\chi}=\omega_{u}\frac{1}{1-u_{\rm L}}\approx 2\omega_{\rm L} \gamma^{2}\). This is the fundamental radiation frequency emitted by electrons from an undulator.

**1.12** The total proton energy at the end of the \(200\,\)MeV linac is \(E=E_{\rm kin}+mc^{2}=1,138.27\,\)MeV and the momentum is \(cp=\sqrt{E^{2}-\left(mc^{2}\right)^{2}}=644.44\,\)MeV. Finally the velocity is \(\beta=\frac{cp}{E}=0.56616\) or about half the velocity of light.

**1.13** Due to Lorentz contraction the length of the linac is reduced by the factor \(\gamma\) which along the linac is \(\gamma\left(z\right)=\gamma_{0}+\frac{20}{0.5109990}z=\gamma_{0}+39.139\cdot z\). The initial energy is \(\gamma_{0}=\frac{1}{\sqrt{1-\beta_{0}^{2}}}=1.1547\) and the final energy \(\gamma\left(L\right)=27,418\). Now, the integrated length of the linac is \(\ell=\int_{0}^{L}\frac{\mathrm{d}z}{\gamma_{0}+39.139\cdot z}=\frac{1}{39.139} \,\ln\left(\gamma_{0}+39.139\cdot z\right)\left|_{0}^{L}=0.29458\,\)m. In the electron system the \(3\,\)km SLAC linac has contracted to some \(30\,\)cm. Now coasting, a tube of \(3\,\)km would contract even more to \(\frac{3.000}{\gamma\left(L\right)}=0.10942\,\)m\(\approx 11\,\)cm.

**1.14** The invariant center of mass energy of colliding particles is defined by \(E_{\rm cm}^{2}=\sum E_{i}^{2}-\sum\left(cp_{i}\right)^{2}\). For the collision of a positron with a target electron assumed to be at rest this evaluates to \(E_{\rm cm}^{2}=\left(\gamma mc^{2}+mc^{2}\right)^{2}-\left(\gamma\beta mc^{2} \right)^{2}=2\left(\gamma+1\right)m^{2}c^{4}\) or \(E_{\rm cm}=\sqrt{2\left(\gamma+1\right)}mc^{2}\). This is also the available energy to produce new particles since no particles must be conserved in a positron-electron collision. In an electron-electron collision the available energy would be only \(E_{\rm avail}=E_{\rm cm}-2mc^{2}\) because the lepton number must be conserved in the collision. The same calculation for head-on collision of such particles would produce a center of mass energy of \(E_{\rm cm}=2\gamma mc^{2}\). Obviously, head-on collisions provide more available energy to produce new particles.

**1.15** From the invariant \(E_{\rm cm}^{2}=\sum E_{i}^{2}-\sum\left(cp_{i}\right)^{2}\) we get for a particle colliding with a target particle at rest \(E_{\rm cm}^{2}=\left(\gamma mc^{2}+m_{\rm t}c^{2}\right)^{2}-\left(\gamma \beta mc^{2}\right)^{2}=\left(\gamma mc^{2}\right)^{2}+2\gamma mc^{2}m_{\rm t }c^{2}+\left(m_{\rm t}c^{2}\right)^{2}-\left(\gamma\beta mc^{2}\right)^{2}\), where \(m_{\rm t}\) is the mass of the target particle. The available energy to produce a \(\psi/J\) particle must be \(3.1\,\)GeV. In case of a proton colliding with a target proton, the center of mass energy must be at least \(E_{\rm cm}=3.1\,\)GeV\(+mc^{2}\), because the proton number must be preserved. With \(m=m_{\rm t}\) we get \(E_{\rm cm}=\sqrt{2\left(\gamma+1\right)}mc^{2}=3.1+2mc^{2}\) and solving for the particle energy we get \(\gamma=\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{3.1}{0.938}+2\right)-1=13.071\). The proton energy must therefore be at least \(E_{\rm p}\geq 12.264\,\)GeV which was available at the Brookhaven AGS. In case of a positron colliding with a target electron the center of mass energy is also the available energy since the lepton number in this case is zero. Therefore, \(\sqrt{2\left(\gamma+1\right)}mc^{2}=3.1\,\)GeV and the minimum positron energy \(\gamma=\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{3.1}{0.000511}\right)^{2}-1=1.84\cdot 10^{7}\). This energy is not available at any existing particle accelerator. Only in an electron-positron colliding beam storage ring like SPEAR is it possible in head-on collisions to reach sufficient center of mass energy to produce a \(\psi/J\) particle.


\(L_{\rm p2}=0.322\,{\rm cm}\), \(L_{\rm p3}=0.445\,{\rm m}\), \(L_{\rm p4}=0.540\,{\rm m}\). These are realistic drift tube lengths. For electrons, the drift tube lengths would have to be much longer \(L_{\rm p1}=20.315\,{\rm m},L_{\rm p2}=21.007\,{\rm m}\), \(L_{\rm p3}=21.204\,{\rm m}\), \(L_{\rm p4}=21.287\,{\rm m}\) due to the higher velocities It is obvious that much higher frequency microwave sources had to be developed before this principle could be applied to electrons. This became possible with the invention of the klystron.

## Solutions for Chap. 3

**3.1** The total electron energy at injection is \(E_{\rm tot}=(50+511)\ 10^{3}=cp=\gamma mc^{2}\frac{v}{c}=\gamma mc^{2}\beta\). From (1.76) and an orbit radius of \(1.23\,{\rm m}\), the magnetic field on the orbit is \(\frac{B_{\rm i}}{\beta}=\frac{E_{\rm tot}/c}{0.3\,R}=1.520\times 10^{-3}\,[{ \rm T}]\). The velocity can be derived from \(\gamma=E_{\rm tot}/mc^{2}=1.0978\) and \(\beta_{\rm i}=0.41260\). Therefore the magnetic field at injection is \(B_{\rm i}=6.273\times 10^{-4}\,[{\rm T}]\). The field increases at a \(60\,{\rm Hz}\) cycle and the particle needs a time of \(\tau=2\pi R/c\beta_{\rm i}=6.243\,6\times 10^{-8}\,{\rm s}\) for the first turn. During that time, the magnetic field increases by \(\Delta B\approx B_{0}\omega\tau=1.907\times 10^{-5}\,[{\rm T}]\). At \(20\,{\rm MeV}\), the particles have gained virtually velocity of light with \(\beta\approx 1\). The field change per turn at \(20\,{\rm MeV}\) is now less by the factor \(\beta_{\rm i}\) for \(\Delta B\approx 7.866\,6\times 10^{-6}\,[{\rm T}]\). The reason for this drop of acceleration is due to the higher velocity of the particle making the go-around time shorter. The acceleration is indeed slow and it takes the particles more than a million turns to reach the final energy.

**3.2** From (1.4) we choose Ampere's law while ignoring the electric field and apply it to the betatron magnet. We integrate over an area which includes one coil. The left hand side of this integral can be expressed with Stoke's Theorem as a line integral of the magnetic field along the boundary of the area chosen. The right hand side is just the total current in the coil multiplied by \(\mu_{0}\). To be able to evaluate the line integral, we choose a boundary or integration path starting in the middle of the magnet aperture (orbit) and integrate the field (\(\mu_{\rm r}=1\)) along a vertical line to the magnet pole. This field is just the desired field \(B_{y0}\) The integration path through the magnet iron to the mid plane is zero because we assume (\(\mu_{\rm r}=\infty\)). Integration from the magnet iron along the midplane to the origin of the integration path is also zero because all fields in the midplane of a symmetric magnet are in the vertical direction while the integration path is in the horizontal direction. That gives the end result of \(B_{y0}\frac{1}{2}g=\mu_{0}I_{\rm coil}\). Note, for the integration path chosen, we have to use here only half the gap. The field for \(42\,{\rm MeV}\) electrons is \(B_{y0}=\frac{cp}{0.3\cdot R}=0.35\,{\rm T}\) and the total current in one coil is \(I_{\rm coil}=13,926\) A. This seems to be a large current, but actually isn't. Magnet coils are wound of many turns and the current from the power supply is only \(I_{\rm ps}=I_{\rm coil}/n_{\rm turns}\). if the coil in this example has say 20 turns then the power supply current is only \(I_{\rm ps}=696.33\) A which is perfectly acceptable.

**3.3** The microwave frequency scales inversely to the relativistic factor \(\gamma\) or \(f_{\rm rf,max}/f_{\rm rf,0}=\gamma_{0}/\gamma\). The relativistic factor is \(\gamma=1+\frac{E_{\rm kin}}{mc^{2}}\) and the microwave frequency is then given by \(\frac{f_{\rm rf}}{f_{\rm rf,0}}=\frac{E_{0}}{E}\). For protons \(mc^{2}=938.27\,\)MeV and the end frequency \(f_{\rm rf}=0.610f_{\rm rf,0}\). Deuterons are twice as heavy \(m_{\rm D}c^{2}=1,875.61\,\)MeV and \(f_{\rm rf}=0.758f_{\rm rf,0}\). The situation for electrons is quite different. The rest mass is \(mc^{2}=0.511\,\)MeV and \(f_{\rm rf}=1,175f_{\rm rf,0}\). The frequency swing is way too large to be practical and this is the reason why synchro-cyclotrons work only for heavier particles and at energies where the relativistic factor is not too far from unity.

**3.4** The energy loss to synchrotron radiation power per electron is given by (24.41). This energy loss should be multiplied with the circulating current to get the total radiation power. \(P_{y}=8.85\times 10^{-5}\frac{E^{4}}{R}\frac{I}{e}=55.976\,I\). For 1W of synchrotron radiation power the current should be \(17.865\,\)mA.

**3.5** a.) The bending radius at \(25\,\)MeV is \(\frac{1}{R}=0.3\frac{B}{E}=2.568\,\)m\({}^{-1}\)(assuming \(\beta\approx 1\)) or \(2R=0.7788\,\)m. b.) We choose a gap of \(10\,\)cm. c.) The excitation current for the field is derived similar to problem 27.2.4 and is \(I_{\rm coil}=\frac{B}{\mu_{0}}\frac{1}{2}g=4,259.6\) A. The length of the coil is \(L_{\rm coil}=2\pi R+10\,\%=2.69\,\)m and the resistance is \(R_{\rm el}=\rho_{\rm Cu}\frac{L_{\rm coil}}{A}=1.205\times 10^{-4}\ \Omega\) (\(\rho_{\rm Cu}=1.68\cdot 10^{-8}\ \Omega\)m at \(20\ ^{\circ}\)C) The electrical power loss in each coil is then \(P_{\rm coil}=R_{\rm el}\cdot I_{\rm coil}^{2}=2186\) W and, yes, you need water cooling. d.) The electrical power requirement does not depend on the number of turns, only on the amount of copper in the coil. If the coil is made of \(n\) turns, then the current will be reduced by the factor \(n\).Yet, the length of the coil is increased by \(n\) and the cross section decreases by the factor \(n\).To summarize, the coil resistance is increased by \(n^{2}\) while the current scales like \(1/n\). Therefore the power is independent of \(n\).

**3.6** The frequency swing depend on the velocity of the protons. The relativistic factor at injection is \(\gamma_{0}=\frac{\sqrt{\left(mc^{2}\right)^{2}+\left(c\gamma_{0}\right)^{2}}} {mc^{2}}=10.706\) and at the maximum energy \(\gamma=426.35\). The corresponding velocities are at injection \(\beta_{0}=0.995\) and at maximum energy \(\beta\approx 1.000\). The frequency changes only by \(0.44\,\%\).

## Solutions for Chap. 4

**4.1** From the variational principle (4.1) and the definition of the Hamiltonian (4.26) we have \(\delta\int_{t_{0}}^{t_{1}}L\left(\varphi\right)\frac{{\rm d}\varphi}{{\rm d}t }{\rm d}t=-\delta\int_{t_{0}}^{t_{1}}[\sum\dot{q}_{i}P_{i}-{\cal H}_{t}\left(t \right)]{\rm d}t=0\) and after changing to \(\varphi\) this is \(\delta\int_{t_{0}}^{t_{1}}\left[\frac{\partial q_{i}}{\partial\varphi}\frac{ {\rm d}\varphi}{{\rm d}t}P_{i}-{\cal H}_{\varphi}\left(\varphi\right)\frac{{ \rm d}\varphi}{{\rm d}t}\right]{\rm d}t=0\). Therefore \({\cal H}_{t}=\frac{{\rm d}\varphi}{{\rm d}t}{\cal H}_{\varphi}\).

**4.3** We apply \(\frac{{\rm d}}{{\rm d}t}\frac{{\partial}L}{\dot{x}}-\frac{{\partial}L}{\dot{x} }=0\) to the Lagrangian (4.25) in curvilinear coordinates. With \(\beta_{h}^{2}=\left(\dot{x}^{2}+\dot{y}^{2}+\dot{z}^{2}+h^{2}\dot{z}^{2}\right)/c^ {2}\) we get \(\frac{{\partial}L}{\dot{x}}=m\frac{h\kappa_{z}\dot{z}^{2}}{\sqrt{1-\beta_{h}^{ 2}}}+e\left(\dot{x}\frac{{\partial}A_{x}}{\dot{x}}+\dot{y}\frac{{\partial}A_{y }}{\dot{x}}+h\dot{z}\frac{{\partial}A_{z}}{\dot{x}}+\kappa_{z}\dot{z}A_{z} \right)-e\frac{{\rm d}\phi}{{\rm d}t}\) and \(\frac{{\rm d}}{{\rm d}t}\frac{{\partial}L}{\dot{x}}=\frac{{\rm d}}{{\rm d}t} \left(\frac{\dot{z}}{\sqrt{1-\beta_{h}^{2}}}\right)\)

\(+e\left(\dot{x}\frac{{\partial}A_{x}}{\dot{x}}+\dot{y}\frac{{\partial}A_{y}}{ \dot{y}}+\dot{z}\frac{{\partial}A_{z}}{\dot{z}}\right)=ymh\kappa_{x}\dot{z}^{2}+ e\left(\dot{x}\frac{{\partial}A_{x}}{\dot{x}}+\dot{y}\frac{{\partial}A_{y}}{ \dot{x}}+\dot{z}\frac{{\partial}A_{z}}{\dot{x}}+\kappa_{x}\dot{z}A_{z}\right)\)\(-e\frac{\partial\phi}{\partial x}\). In curvilinear coordinates

\[\begin{split}\mathbf{B}&=\nabla\times\mathbf{A}\\ &\equiv\left\{\frac{1}{h}\left[\frac{\partial}{\partial y}\left(hA_ {z}\right)-\frac{\partial A_{y}}{\partial z}\right],\ \frac{1}{h}\left[\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial z}-\frac{\partial}{\partial z} \left(hA_{z}\right)\right],\ \left[\frac{\partial A_{y}}{\partial x}-\frac{\partial A_{x}}{ \partial y}\right]\right\}\end{split}\]

and we can replace \(\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial y}=\frac{\partial A_{y}}{\partial x}-B_{z}\) and \(\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial z}=\frac{\partial}{\partial y}\left(hA_{z} \right)+hB_{y}=h\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial z}+\kappa_{x}A_{z}+hB_{y}\) and thereby replace the terms involving the vector potential by magnetic fields to give the equation of motion \(\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\left(\gamma m\dot{x}\right)=\gamma mh\kappa_{x }\dot{z}^{2}+e\left(\dot{y}B_{z}-\dot{z}B_{y}\right)+eE_{x}\) which is the same as (4.16).

## Solutions for Chap. 5

We use the Lagrangian (4.25) and evaluate (4.5) to get first \(\frac{\partial L}{\partial x}=\gamma m\dot{x}+eA_{x}\) and second \(\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\frac{\partial L}{\partial x}=\frac{\mathrm{d} }{\mathrm{d}t}\left(\gamma m\dot{x}\right)+e\left(\dot{x}\frac{\partial A_{x} }{\partial x}+\dot{y}\frac{\partial A_{y}}{\partial y}+\dot{z}\frac{\partial A _{x}}{\partial z}\right)\). Then \(\frac{\partial L}{\partial x}=\gamma m\dot{z}^{2}h\kappa_{x}+e\left(\dot{x} \frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial x}+\dot{y}\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial y}+ \dot{z}\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial z}\frac{\partial\left(hA_{z}\right)}{ \partial x}\right)+eE_{x}\) and the Lagrange equation is \(\frac{\mathrm{d}(ym\dot{x})}{\mathrm{d}t}+e\left(\dot{x}\frac{\partial A_{x}} {\partial x}+\dot{y}\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial y}+\dot{z}\frac{\partial A_ {x}}{\partial z}\right)=\gamma m\dot{z}^{2}h\kappa_{x}+e\left(\dot{x}\frac{ \partial A_{x}}{\partial x}+\dot{y}\frac{\partial A_{y}}{\partial y}+\dot{z} \frac{\partial\left(hA_{z}\right)}{\partial x}\right)+eE_{x}\) or after reordering and replacing \(\frac{\partial A_{y}}{\partial x}-\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial y}=B_{z}\) and \(\frac{\partial\left(hA_{z}\right)}{\partial x}-\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial z }=hB_{y}\) the equation of motion is finally \(\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\left(\gamma m\dot{x}\right)=\gamma m\dot{z}^{2 }h\kappa_{x}+e\left(B_{z}\dot{y}+hB_{y}\dot{z}\right)+eE_{x}\). Inserting into the Lagrange equations we get first \(\frac{\partial L}{\partial z}=\gamma m\dot{z}^{2}hh^{\prime}+e\left(\dot{x} \frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial z}+\dot{y}\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial z}+ \dot{z}h\frac{\partial A_{z}}{\partial z}\right)+eE_{z}=\gamma m\dot{z}^{2}h \left(\kappa^{\prime}_{x}x+\kappa^{\prime}_{y}y\right)+e\left(\dot{x}\frac{ \partial A_{x}}{\partial z}+\dot{y}\frac{\partial A_{y}}{\partial z}+\dot{z}h \frac{\partial A_{z}}{\partial z}\right)+eE_{z}\) and second \(\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\frac{\partial L}{\partial z}=\frac{\mathrm{d}}{ \mathrm{d}t}\left(\gamma mh^{2}\dot{z}\right)+e\frac{\mathrm{d}\left(hA_{z} \right)}{\mathrm{d}t}\). With \(\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial z}=hB_{y}+\frac{\partial\left(hA_{z}\right)}{ \partial x}\) and \(\frac{\partial A_{y}}{\partial z}=-hB_{x}+\frac{\partial\left(hA_{z}\right)}{ \partial y}\) the equation of motion is \(\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\left(\gamma mh^{2}\dot{z}\right)=\gamma m\dot{z }^{2}h\kappa_{x}+\gamma m\dot{z}^{2}h\left(\kappa^{\prime}_{x}x+\kappa^{ \prime}_{y}y\right)+e\left(hB_{y}\dot{x}-hB_{x}\dot{y}\right)+eE_{z}\).

Application of (5.33)-(5.30) gives with \(Ax=\left(x^{\prime}A_{x}+y^{\prime}A_{y}+hA_{z}\right)\) the Lagrangian \(L=-mc^{2}\sqrt{1-\beta^{2}}+e\frac{v}{y}Ax-e\phi\) and from this \(\frac{L+\gamma mc^{2}}{\gamma mv}\frac{s^{\prime}}{v}=s^{\prime}+\frac{e}{ \gamma mv}Ax-e\phi\). Dividing by the momentum \(p=\gamma mv\) and setting \(p=\frac{p_{0}}{1-\delta}\), \(\frac{L+\gamma mc^{2}}{\gamma mv}\frac{s^{\prime}}{v}=s^{\prime}+\left(1-\delta \right)\frac{e}{p_{0}}Ax-\left(1-\delta\right)\frac{e}{p_{0}}\frac{s^{\prime}}{ v}\phi\). The variational principle \(\Delta\int\frac{L+\gamma mc^{2}}{p}\frac{s^{\prime}}{v}\mathrm{d}t=\Delta\int\frac{L+ \gamma mc^{2}}{p}\mathrm{d}z=0\), because constant additions or factors to the Lagrangian do not change the variational principle.

Use the definition of the bending radius (5.3) and remember that we express the particle energy only in Volts, which is \(E/e\). For 1 GeV particles we have then \(E/e\) =10\({}^{9}\) V. With this the curvature is \(\frac{1}{\rho}\approx 0.2998\frac{B}{\beta E}\). In the last step of the equation we get a bit sloppy by using the energy in GeV instead of the voltage \(E/e\) as is commonly done. Numerically, however, we would ignore \(e\) insert only the voltage in GV.

**5.4** We evaluate the second derivative of the solution \(P^{\prime\prime}\left(z\right)\) and insert into (5.74). From the first derivative \(P^{\prime}\left(z\right)\) we obtain with the property of the Wronskian (5.73) for the principal solutions the second derivative \(P^{\prime\prime}\left(z\right)=S^{\prime\prime}\left(z\right)\int_{0}^{z}p \left(\bar{z}\right)C\left(\bar{z}\right)\mathrm{d}\bar{z}-C^{\prime\prime} \left(z\right)\int_{0}^{z}p\left(\bar{z}\right)S\left(\bar{z}\right)\mathrm{d} \bar{z}\). Recalling that \(S^{\prime\prime}=-KS\) and \(C^{\prime\prime}=-KC\), we insert the expression for \(P^{\prime\prime}\left(z\right)\) and (5.75) into (5.74) and verify the validity of the ansatz (5.75). The function \(P\left(z\right)\) is therefore indeed a particular solution of the inhomogeneous differential equation (5.74).

**5.5** The Cartesian coordinates \(\left(x,x^{\prime}\right)\) are identical to the normalized coordinates \(\left(w,\dot{w}\right)\) except for some scaling factors if we consider the independent variable to be \(z\) in both cases. The transformations are then given from (5.54) by \(x^{\prime}=-vx\tan\psi\) and \(J=\frac{1}{2}\frac{vx^{2}}{\cos^{2}\psi}\) or \(x=\sqrt{2J/v}\cos\psi\) and \(x^{\prime}=2v\sin\psi\). With this, the Hamiltonian is \(\mathcal{K}=vJ\sin^{2}\psi+D\frac{v}{v}\cos^{2}\psi\). The frequency of the oscillator is \(\dot{\psi}\) or from the equation of motion \(\frac{\partial\mathcal{K}}{\partial J}=\dot{\psi}=v\sin^{2}\psi+\frac{D}{v} \cos^{2}\psi\) which requires that \(D=v^{2}\). Finally, \(\mathcal{K}=vJ\) and \(\frac{\partial\mathcal{K}}{\partial J}=\dot{\psi}=v\) as we would expect.

## Solutions for Chap. 6

**6.1** The coil power, assuming only one turn, is \(P=RI^{2}\). The resistance is \(R=\rho\frac{L}{A}\), where \(\rho\) is the specific resistance of the coil material (copper), \(L\) the length of the coil and \(A\) the coil cross section.With \(n_{\mathrm{t}}\) turns, the resistance changes to \(R=\rho\frac{Ln_{\mathrm{t}}}{A/n_{\mathrm{t}}}=\rho\frac{L}{A}n_{\mathrm{t}}^{2}\), the current is \(\frac{L}{n_{\mathrm{t}}}\) and the total power \(P=\rho\frac{L}{A}n_{\mathrm{t}}^{2}\left(\frac{L}{n_{\mathrm{t}}}\right)^{2}\) is independent of the number of turns. The total coil power is \(P=RI^{2}\). Utilizing the current density \(j\) the total power is now \(P=\rho LAj^{2}\). The weight of copper is \(W=\sigma LA\) and the total power is finally \(P=\rho\frac{W}{\sigma}j^{2}\) depending only on specific resistance, weight and current density.

**6.2** The focal length of an electric quadrupole is \(\frac{1}{f}=k\ell=\frac{e}{\beta^{2}E}g\ell\). Solving for the gradient \(g\) we get \(g=\frac{\beta^{2}E}{e\ell}\frac{1}{f}=19.81\,\mathrm{MV/m^{2}}\).The profile of the electrodes is given by \(V_{2}=-\frac{1}{2}g\left(x^{2}-y^{2}\right)\) and the profile of the electrodes is therefore given by \(V_{2}=9.905\cdot 10^{6}R_{\mathrm{a}}^{2}=24,\,763\,\mathrm{V}\) where \(R_{\mathrm{a}}\) is the aperture radius of the electric quadrupole. The r.h.s. derives from the potential for \(R_{\mathrm{a}}=0.05\,\mathrm{m}\) and \(y=0\). The electrode potentials are \(V_{2}=\pm 24,\,763\,\mathrm{V}\).

**6.3** For a purely transverse field \(\mathbf{B}=\left(B_{x},B_{y},0\right)=\mathbf{\nabla}\times\mathbf{A}\). The field components are \(B_{x}=\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial y}-\frac{\partial A_{y}}{\partial z}= \frac{\partial A_{z}}{\partial y}\) and \(B_{y}=\frac{\partial A_{z}}{\partial z}-\frac{\partial A_{z}}{\partial x}=- \frac{\partial A_{z}}{\partial x}\). Here we made use of the fact that the fields do not depend on the longitudinal coordinate \(z\). Therefore \(A_{x},A_{y}\) are constant which we may as well choose to be zero \(A_{x}=A_{y}=0\) and the magnetic field is \(\mathbf{B}=\left(\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial y},-\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial x },0\right).\) If we derive the magnetic field from a scalar potential \(\mathbf{B}=-\mathbf{\nabla}V\), we would get \(\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial y}=-\frac{\partial V}{\partial x}\) and \(\frac{\partial A_{x}}{\partial x}=\frac{\partial V}{\partial y}\) or \(A_{z}=-\int\frac{\partial V}{\partial x}\mathrm{d}y\) and\(\int\frac{\partial V}{\partial y}\mathrm{d}x\). For a dipole magnet \(B_{x}=0\) and \(B_{y}=B_{0}\) and the potential is \(V_{1}=-B_{0}y+f(x)\) and \(\left(\frac{\partial A_{z}}{\partial y}=gy,\frac{\partial A_{z}}{\partial x}=-gx \right)\). For a quadrupole we have a potential \(V=-gy\) and \(\frac{\partial A_{z}}{\partial y}=gy,\)\(\frac{\partial A_{z}}{\partial x}=-gx\). After integration \(A_{z}=\frac{1}{2}gy^{2}\) and \(A_{z}=-\frac{1}{2}gx^{2}\) to give a combined potential \(A_{z}=-\frac{1}{2}g\left(x^{2}-y^{2}\right)\). Following from their definition both, \(V\) and \(A_{z}\), depend differently on the coordinates but are equivalent otherwise for purely transverse fields. While the scalar potentials \(V\) define equipotential lines, the vector potential \(A_{z}\) defines the field lines which are orthogonal to the equipotential lines.

**6.4** Such a magnet is basically a quadrupole which is displaced to generate a dipole field component along the path of the beam. From \(\frac{1}{\rho}=k\Delta x\) the displacement is \(\Delta x=0.00741\,\mathrm{m}\) or \(7.41\,\mathrm{mm}\). The sextupole term is a small perturbation of the quadrupole profile. From (6.86) and the definitions for \(A_{ij}\),we get for this combined field magnet the potential \(V=\frac{\partial E}{ec}\left[\frac{1}{\rho}y+kxy+\frac{1}{6}m\left(3x^{2}y-y^ {3}\right)\right]=0.557y+75.15xy+640\left(3x^{2}y-y^{3}\right)=\mathrm{const}\). The constant can be estimated as follows: At a displacement \(\Delta x=7.41\,\mathrm{mm}\) we require an aperture of \(r=1\,\mathrm{cm}\) and so we define one point (\(x=7.41\,\mathrm{mm}\),\(y=10\,\mathrm{mm}\)) of the profile. Inserted into the profile equation, we get \(V\left(0.00741,0.01\right)=0.01155285\) and the pole profile equation is \(0.557y+75.15xy+640\left(3x^{2}y-y^{3}\right)=0.01155285\).

**6.5** Forces between magnet pole exist because a change of the field volume is associated with a change of field energy. Increasing the gap of a dipole magnet while keeping the field constant results in an increase of field energy due to work against the force trying to reduce the gap or the distance between poles. Therefore the force is attracting the pole. The field energy in the dipole magnet with a pole gap \(G\) is \(E_{\mathrm{f}}=\frac{1}{2\mu_{0}}B^{2}wlG=89570\cdot G\). The force is \(F=-\mathrm{d}E/\mathrm{d}G=89570\,\mathrm{N}\)\(=9.13\) tons. The force does not depend on the pole gap.

**26.8** In first approximation, we assume that all the fields are contained within the volume between the two rows of poles and no field leaks out. Separating the poles by \(g\) requires to generate the additional field energy \(\mathrm{d}e=F\mathrm{d}g\) where \(F\) is the force between poles. Since \(\mathrm{d}e>0\) for \(\mathrm{d}g>0\) the force is attractive meaning that the poles are attracted. The force is then \(F=\frac{\mathrm{d}e}{\mathrm{d}g}=\frac{w}{2\mu_{0}}\int_{0}^{15\lambda_{p}}B_{ 0}^{2}\sin^{2}\left(2\pi\frac{z}{\lambda_{p}}\right)\mathrm{d}z=\frac{w}{2\mu_ {0}}B_{0}^{2}\frac{\lambda_{p}}{2\pi}\frac{1}{2}N_{\mathrm{p}}=7,484\,\mathrm{ N}=0.76\,\mathrm{tons}\).

**6.6** See Sect. 6.2.2 for solution. With respect to the numerical part of the question, we calculate the gradient to be \(g=\frac{k\ell}{0.3}\beta E=33.33\,\mathrm{T/m}\) and the coil excitation current must be \(I_{\mathrm{coil}}=\frac{gR^{2}}{2\mu_{0}}=11937\) A-turns.

**6.7** Since this is a cylindrical problem, we use the definition of the magnetic potential in (6.7) \(P\left(r,z\right)=\sum\limits_{n\geq 0}C_{n}r^{n}\mathrm{e}^{\mathrm{i}n\varphi}\) from which we get the magnetic fields. From Maxwell's equation \(\nabla\times\mathbf{E}=-\frac{\partial\mathbf{B}}{\partial t}\) and integrating over the cross section of the rotating coil we get an emf of \(mV=-\partial\phi/\partial t\), where \(\phi=\phi_{0}\cos 2\pi\,vt\) is the flux through the coil at time \(t\) and \(m\) the number of turns in the coil. At time \(t=0\)we assume the coil to be parallel with the midplane enclosing the maximum flux \(\phi_{0}=B_{\varphi}2R\). We ignore the length of the coil because the field is assumed to be uniform longitudinally. From the potential, we get \(B_{\varphi}\propto\mathrm{e}^{\mathrm{i}n\varphi}\), \(\varphi=2\pi\,vt\) and the induced voltage in the coil is \(mP=2\pi\,v\sum\limits_{n\geq 0}C_{n}r^{n}\mathrm{e}^{\mathrm{i}n2\pi\,vt}\). The signal voltage from the rotating coil includes therefore all harmonics of the magnetic field. Usually the harmonics are normalized to the ideal field of the magnet at \(r=1\,\mathrm{cm}\). The signal of the ideal magnet of order \(N\) is \(mV_{N}\propto 2\pi\,vN\mathrm{e}^{\mathrm{i}N2\pi\,vt}\) and the relative strengths \(r_{nN}\) of the harmonics are \(r_{nN}=R^{n-N}\frac{V_{n}}{V_{N}}\).

**6.8** A finite width of a quadrupole is like superimposing poles of opposite polarity on both sides of a pole. This is a symmetric perturbation with two negative poles within a \(90^{\circ}\) quadrant. We may complete this picture by assuming that there is also an additional pole superimposed on the main pole with the same polarity. We have now in each quadrant a main pole with a somewhat lower quadrupole field and three poles describing the perturbation by a multipole. In the case of a quadrupole this would be a 12-pole. Since the perturbation is nonlinear but symmetric about the main pole, we observe all odd harmonics of the quadrupole field, \(3\times 4=\)12-pole, \(5\times 4=\)20-pole, etc. These perturbations are due to the finite width of the quadrupole and have nothing to do with tolerances. We call therefore these harmonics, "allowed" harmonics or multipole components.

**6.9** The fields scale differently depending on the multipole field order. The quadrupole scales linearly and therefore \(B_{2}\left(1\,\mathrm{cm}\right)=B_{2}\frac{1}{1.79}=0.20832\,\mathrm{T}\). The next higher order field is the sextupole field which scales quadratically and the normalized field is therefore \(B_{3}\left(1\,\mathrm{cm}\right)=B_{2}\frac{B_{3}}{1.79^{2}}=1.8727\cdot 10^{-4}\). Similar renormalizations lead to \(B_{4}\left(1\,\mathrm{cm}\right)=1.925\cdot 10^{-5}\), \(B_{5}\left(1\,\mathrm{cm}\right)=1.6833\cdot 10^{-5}\), \(B_{6}\left(1\,\mathrm{cm}\right)=1.8964\cdot 10^{-5}\), \(B_{7}\left(1\,\mathrm{cm}\right)=2.9186\cdot 10^{-7}\), \(B_{8}\left(1\,\mathrm{cm}\right)=1.875\cdot 10^{-7}\), \(B_{9}\left(1\,\mathrm{cm}\right)=2.322\cdot 10^{-8}\), \(B_{10}\left(1\,\mathrm{cm}\right)=1.8066\cdot 10^{-7}\). The 12-pole and 20-pole components do not follow the general downward trend and are larger, because they are "allowed" harmonics due to the finite pole width.

**6.10** The upright octupole potential is from Table 6.6 given by \(-\frac{ec}{cp}V_{4}=r\frac{1}{6}\left(x^{3}y-xy^{3}\right)=\mathrm{const}\). From the geometry of an octupole the pole tip is at a radius \(R\) and angle \(22.5^{\circ}\) or at \(x=R\cos\pi/8\), \(y=R\sin\pi/8\). With these values the constant or potential of the pole is \(\frac{1}{6}\left(x^{3}y-xy^{3}\right)=1.50R^{4}\). It is actually easier to do the calculation for a rotated octupole, which has a pole tip in the midplane at \(x=R\) and \(y=0\). From Table 6.6 the potential is \(-V_{4}\left(x,y\right)=\underline{\underline{s}}_{4}\,\frac{1}{24}\left(x^{4} -6x^{2}y^{2}+y^{4}\right)=\mathrm{const}\) and the equation for the pole profile is \(\frac{1}{24}\left(x^{4}-6x^{2}y^{2}+y^{4}\right)=R\). The field in the midplane is \(B_{x}\left(x,0\right)=\underline{\underline{s}}_{4}\,\frac{1}{6}x^{3}\), the field at the pole tip is expected to be \(0.2\,\mathrm{T}\) and the octupole strength parameter is \(\underline{\underline{s}}_{4}=s_{4}=\frac{6x0.2}{0.03^{3}}=44,444\,\mathrm{T}/ \mathrm{m}^{3}\). To calculate the coil excitation current, we integrate from the octupole center along the \(x\)-axis to the pole giving \(\int_{0}^{R}\frac{1}{6}x^{3}\mathrm{d}x=\frac{1}{24}R^{4}\). The integration through the iron is zero as is the integration back along the \(45^{\circ}\) line from the return yoke to the magnet center, because field and integration path are orthogonal. Similar to the calculation of the excitation current for the quadrupole, we have \(I_{\mathrm{coil}}=\frac{s_{4}}{24\mu_{0}}R^{4}=1,193.7\,\mathrm{A}\)-turns.

**6.11** For a pure dipole field the current distribution scales like \(\cos\!\varphi\), we assume the coil thickness to be \(h\left(\theta\right)=h_{0}\cos\varphi\) and the current density at \(\varphi=0\) is from \(\mathrm{d}I\left(\varphi\right)=I_{1}\cos\varphi\)\(\mathrm{d}\varphi\) and \(\Delta A=h\left(\varphi\right)R\Delta\varphi\)\(\mathrm{just}\,j=\frac{I_{1}}{R\Delta\phi h_{0}}\). To generate a field of \(B_{0}=\mu_{0}H_{0}=5\,\mathrm{T}\) we need a peak current of \(I_{1}=2RH_{1}=2R\frac{B_{0}}{\mu_{0}}=2.387\times 10^{5}\,\mathrm{A}\) and \(\hat{\jmath}=10^{9}=\frac{2.387\times 10^{5}\,\Delta\varphi}{R\Delta\phi h_{0}}\) with \(h_{0}=7.96\,\mathrm{mm}\). The maximum coil thickness is therefore about 8 mm.

## Solutions for Chap. 7

**7.1** Study Fig. 7.16 in detail. Now, make a similar sketch with the cosine-like trajectory for the horizontal and vertical plane both ending at the focal point. Tracing back both cosine-like trajectories from the focal point straight to the intersection with the incoming cosine-like trajectories. The distance from the focal point to the intersections should be equal to the doublet focal lengths from (7.20). The two intersections are also known from light optics as the principal planes of the system.

**7.2** Transform through doublet and \(5\,\mathrm{m}\) drift space to focal point. We need only the \(M_{11}\) element of the total transformation matrix, which must be zero to let a parallel trajectory entering the doublet go through the focal point such that \(x=M_{11}x_{0}=0\). We have \(M_{11,x}=1-\frac{d+D}{|f_{1}|}-\frac{D}{|f_{2}|}+\frac{dD}{|f_{1}/2|}=0\). Since we want the focal point in both planes, we have a second equation \(M_{11,y}=1+\frac{d+D}{|f_{1}|}+\frac{D}{|f_{2}|}+\frac{dD}{|f_{1}/2|}=0\). From both equations we isolate \(f_{1}\) and \(f_{2}\) for \(f_{1}=\sqrt{6}\,\mathrm{m}\) and \(f_{2}=5/\sqrt{6}\,\mathrm{m}\). The total focal lengths in both planes are different \(f_{x}^{\star}=\frac{5\sqrt{6}}{\sqrt{6}-1}=8.4495\,\mathrm{m}\) and \(f_{y}^{\star}=\frac{5\sqrt{6}}{\sqrt{6}+1}=3.5505\,\mathrm{m}\). The definition of these focal lengths is the distance of two principal planes from the focal point. The principal planes, one for each plane, are located at the intersection of the parallel incoming trajectory and the extension of the trajectories reaching the focal point. The principal planes are the positions of virtual lenses resembling the doublet. These lenses are at different location for both planes.

**7.3** The transformation matrix of a quadrupole doublet with a drift space of length \(d\) between quadrupoles is \(\left(\begin{array}{cc}1-d/f_{1}&d\\ -1/f^{\star}&1-d/f_{2}\end{array}\right)\), where \(\frac{1}{f^{\star}}=\frac{1}{f_{1}}+\frac{1}{f_{2}}-\frac{d}{f_{1}f_{2}}\). We set \(\frac{1}{f_{1}}=-\frac{1}{f_{2}}=0.2\,\mathrm{m}^{-1}\) and get for the on-energy focal lengths in both planes \(\frac{1}{f^{\star}}=\frac{1}{25}\) or \(f^{\star}=25\,\mathrm{m}\). Since the combined focal length depends quadratically on the energy, we get a \(\pm 10\,\%\) spread in focal length. The beam width at the focal point is with \(f_{1}=5\,\mathrm{m}\) is \(r^{2}=\epsilon\beta=\left(1-d/f_{1}\right)^{2}\epsilon\beta_{0}+d^{2}\epsilon \gamma_{0}=0.64\epsilon\beta_{0}+\frac{\epsilon^{2}}{r_{0}^{2}}\). The beam emittance is \(\epsilon=r_{0}r_{0}^{\prime}\) and therefore the spot size in the horizontal plane is \(r_{x}^{2}=0.64r_{0}^{2}+r\) and in the vertical plane with \(f_{1}=-5\,\mathrm{m}\) is \(r_{y}^{2}=1.44\epsilon\beta_{0}+\frac{\epsilon^{2}}{r_{0}^{2}}\). For the last question on dispersive beam sizes set \(|f_{1}|=5\cdot\left(1+\frac{\Delta\rho}{\rho_{0}}\right)\) and calculate \(r_{x,y}=\left(\Delta p/p_{0}\right)\).

**7.4**: Equations (7.63) and (7.67) give the focal lengths for a wedge magnet in both planes: \(\frac{1}{\kappa f_{x}}\ =\ (\tan\eta_{0}+\tan\eta_{\rm e})\cos\theta\ -\ \tan\eta_{0}\tan\eta_{\rm e}\ +\ \sin\theta\) and \(\frac{1}{\kappa f_{y}}\ =\ \tan\eta_{0}\ +\ \tan\eta_{\rm e}\ +\ \frac{1}{3}\delta_{\rm fe}+\delta\). We choose both edge angles to be the same and require that both focal lengths be the same as well. This results in the condition \(2\tan\eta\cos\theta-\tan^{2}\eta+\sin\theta=2\tan\eta+\frac{2}{3}\delta_{f}\), which can be solved for the wedge angle \(\eta\).

**7.5**: The deflection angle \(\vartheta=u^{\prime}_{0}\) and we assume \(u_{0}=0\). Then the betatron amplitude downstream from point \(z_{0}\) is just \(u\left(z\right)=\sqrt{\beta\beta_{0}}\vartheta\ \sin\left(\psi-\psi_{0}\right)\). From this it is clear that the value of the betatron function should be as large as possible at both points to get a large kick amplitude.

**7.6**: a.) a trim coil in \(\mathrm{QF}_{1}\) causes a beam bump which will reach zero again in the middle of \(\mathrm{QF}_{3}\). This is too early and we need to activate another trim coil in \(\mathrm{QD}_{2}\) to be symmetric. The beam bump arrives in the middle of \(\mathrm{QD}_{2}\) with a slope of \(x^{\prime}\). A kick with an angle of \(\theta_{2}=2x^{\prime}\left(\mathrm{QD}_{2}\right)\) will symmetrize the beam bump ending at zero in the middle of \(\mathrm{QF}_{4}\) where a third trim coil \(\theta_{3}=\theta_{1}\) ends the beam bump. Because of symmetry we need to consider only half the three FODO cells from \(\mathrm{QF}_{1}\) to \(\mathrm{QD}_{2}\) for which the transformation matrix be \(\mathcal{M}=\left(\begin{array}{cc}m_{11}&m_{12}\\ m_{21}&m_{22}\end{array}\right)\). The beam bump at \(\mathrm{QD}_{2}\) is then \(x\left(\mathrm{QD}_{2}\right)=m_{12}\theta_{1}\) and \(x^{\prime}\left(\mathrm{QD}_{2}\right)=m_{22}\theta_{1}\). Since \(x\left(\mathrm{QD}_{2}\right)=0.02\) m we get \(\theta_{1}=\frac{0.02}{m_{12}}\) and \(\theta_{3}=-2\cdot x^{\prime}\left(\mathrm{QD}_{2}\right)\). The bump amplitude \(A_{\rm M}\) is not the maximum bump amplitude which occurs in the \(\mathrm{QF}_{2}\) and \(\mathrm{QF}_{3}\).

## Solutions for Chap. 8

**8.1**: We start from \(u=\sqrt{\epsilon\beta}\cos\left(\psi+\delta\right)\), calculate the derivative \(u^{\prime}=-\sqrt{\epsilon}\,\frac{\alpha}{\sqrt{\beta}}\cos\left(\psi+\delta \right)-\frac{\sqrt{\epsilon}}{\sqrt{\beta}}\sin\left(\psi+\delta\right)\), and eliminate from both equations the phase terms to get \(\beta u^{\prime 2}+2\alpha u^{\prime}u+\alpha^{2}u^{2}+\frac{u^{2}}{\beta}=\epsilon\) (*). Defining a coordinate transformation by \(w=u/\sqrt{\beta}\) and \(\dot{w}=\sqrt{\beta}u^{\prime}+\alpha\,\frac{u}{\sqrt{\beta}}\) and inserting into (*) we get \(w^{2}+\dot{w}^{2}=\epsilon\) which is the equation of a circle. The derivative \(\dot{w}=\frac{\mathrm{d}w}{\mathrm{d}\psi}\) and the new independent variable is the phase \(\psi\).

**8.2**: First, we transform the phase ellipse as in problem 8.1. This transformation is scale preserving since its determinant is equal to unity. The phase ellipse is now a circle with radius \(\sqrt{\epsilon}\) and therefore the area of the circle is \(\pi\epsilon\).

**8.3**: Write (8.41) in component form and place beam matrix elements with their definitions (8.38)

**8.4**: The transformation matrix of such a transformer between symmetry points \(P_{0}\) and \(P_{1}\) is \(\begin{pmatrix}0&\sqrt{\beta_{0}\beta}\\ -\frac{1}{\sqrt{\beta_{0}\beta}}&0\end{pmatrix}\). The transformation of \(\beta_{0}\) with \(\alpha_{0}=0\) throughsuch a transformer is \(\beta_{1}=C^{2}\beta_{0}+\frac{1}{\beta_{0}}S^{2}\) and \(\gamma_{1}=C^{2}\beta_{0}+\frac{1}{\beta_{0}}S^{2}=\frac{1}{\beta_{1}}\). The dispersion function transforms through this matching section like a trajectory and we would look for \(\eta_{1}=C\eta_{0}+S\eta_{0}^{\prime}=C\eta_{0}\). A \(\pi/2\)-transformer does not work for the dispersion functions since \(C=0\).

### Solutions for Chap. 9

1.1 The proton energy after accelerating gap \(i\) is \(E_{\rm kin}\left({\rm MeV}\right)=1+0.5i\). At the energies under consideration the protons are nonrelativistic and their velocities are \(v_{i}=c\sqrt{\frac{2E_{\rm kin}}{mc^{2}}}=1.384\times 10^{7}\sqrt{1+0.5i}\,\)m/s. The period of the \(500\,\)MHz rf-field is \(2\,\)ns and the tube lengths therefore must be \(\ell_{i}+\ell_{\rm gap}=n\cdot 2\times 10^{-9}v_{i}\), where \(n\) is an integer and \(\ell_{i}\gg\ell_{\rm gap}\). The first three sections are (\(n=1\)) \(\ell_{1}+\ell_{\rm gap}=3.39\,\)cm, \(\ell_{2}+\ell_{\rm gap}=3.92\,\)cm, and \(\ell_{3}+\ell_{\rm gap}=4.38\,\)cm. These are the minimum lengths of the tubes. To meet the requirement of a minimum tube length of \(15\,\)cm we need to choose \(n_{1}\geq 5,n_{2}\geq 4,n_{3}\geq 4\). That means the first tube length is as long as 5 wavelengths and the second and third tube length is as long as 4 wavelengths.

2.2 Each proton travels at a slightly different velocity due to a finite energy spread. We assume nonrelativistic protons and get for the velocity spread \(\frac{\Delta v}{v_{0}}=\pm\frac{1}{2}\frac{\Delta E}{E_{0}}\). The time \(\tau\) it takes for debunching is equal to the time it take for the fastest particle to travel half the separation of bunches \(\Delta=\frac{C}{1m_{\rm b}}C\) where \(C\) is the circumference. The other half of the bunch spacing is covered by particles with \(\frac{\Delta E}{E_{0}}<0\). The debunching time is then \(\tau=\frac{C}{2m_{\rm b}}\frac{E_{0}}{v_{0}\Delta E}\).

3.3 The accelerating rate is given by \(\frac{{\rm d}E_{\rm kin}}{{\rm d}t}=f_{\rm rev}eV_{\rm rf}\sin\psi_{\rm s}\). We solve for the synchronous phase and insert into (9.74) to get \(\left(\frac{\Delta cp}{cp_{0}}\right)^{2}=\frac{eV_{0}}{\pi h\left|\eta_{\rm e }\right|cp_{0}}\)

\(\left[\cos\varphi+1+\left(2\arcsin\frac{{\rm d}E_{\rm kin}/{\rm d}t}{f_{\rm rev }eV_{\rm rf}}+\varphi-\pi\right)\frac{{\rm d}E_{\rm kin}/{\rm d}t}{f_{\rm rev }eV_{\rm rf}}\right]\).

4.4 We start from (9.52) and write it in the form of a linear harmonic oscillator \(\tilde{\varphi}+\Omega_{0}^{2}\frac{\sin\varphi\cos\psi_{\rm s}-\sin\psi_{\rm s }(1-\cos\varphi)}{\varphi\cos\psi_{\rm s}}\varphi=0\) where the synchrotron frequency is \(\Omega^{2}=\Omega_{0}^{2}\frac{\sin\varphi\cos\psi_{\rm s}-\sin\psi_{\rm s}(1- \cos\varphi)}{\varphi\cos\psi_{\rm s}}\). For small oscillation amplitudes the frequency \(\Omega\approx\Omega_{0}\) and reaches zero at the separatrix. There is also a \(\varphi\)-dependence of the synchrotron frequency indicating a periodic variation as the particle travels along the phase space trajectory.

5.5 The longitudinal emittance is \(\frac{\widehat{\Delta cp}}{cp_{0}}\tilde{\varphi}_{0}=\frac{\Omega_{0}}{h \omega_{\rm rev}\left|\eta_{\rm e}\right|}\tilde{\varphi}_{0}^{2}\) and does not change by increasing the rf-voltage. Since \(\Omega_{0}\propto\sqrt{V_{\rm rf}}\), we get \(\sqrt{V_{\rm rf,0}}\hat{\varphi}_{0}^{2}=\sqrt{V_{\rm rf,1}}\hat{\varphi}_{1}^ {2}\) or \(\hat{\varphi}_{1}=\hat{\varphi}_{1}\left(\frac{V_{\rm rf,0}}{V_{\rm rf,1}} \right)^{1/4}\). The bunch length scales like the fourth root of the rf-voltage.

## Solutions for Chap. 10

We use a FODO lattice with \(\kappa=\sqrt{2}\), \(\hat{\beta}=L\left(2+\sqrt{2}\right)\) and \(\hat{\eta}=\frac{L^{2}}{2\rho}\left(4+\sqrt{2}\right)\) to construct a ring. The beam width in such a lattice is \(\hat{\sigma}_{x}^{2}=\epsilon\hat{\beta}+\hat{\eta}^{2}\left(\frac{\sigma_{E}} {E}\right)^{2}\) and the beam height \(\tilde{\sigma}_{y}^{2}=\epsilon\tilde{\beta}\). Since \(\tilde{\sigma}_{y}<\hat{\sigma}_{x}\) we get \(\hat{\sigma}_{x}^{2}+\tilde{\sigma}_{y}^{2}=R^{2}\approx\epsilon\left(\hat{ \beta}+\tilde{\beta}\right)+\hat{\eta}^{2}\left(\frac{\sigma_{E}}{E}\right)^{2}\). From the peak magnetic field \(\frac{1}{\rho}=0.0036\,\mathrm{m}^{-1}\) and we can solve for \(L\). The length of the bending magnet should be no more than \(0.8L\) and each bending magnet deflects the beam by \(\psi_{\mathrm{b}}=\frac{0.8L}{\rho}\). To complete a ring, we need \(n=2\pi/\psi_{\mathrm{b}}\) half cells. Numerically, we get \(10^{4}R^{2}\approx 0.2L+9.75\times 10^{-5}L^{2}=4\) or solving for half the cell length \(L=19.818\,\mathrm{m}\).

For a Gaussian beam the largest beam size is along one axis or in case of an optimum FODO lattice \(\hat{\sigma}_{x}^{2}=\epsilon\hat{\beta}+\hat{\eta}^{2}\left(\frac{\sigma_{E}} {E}\right)^{2}\) from which we get \(L\) since \(\tilde{\sigma}_{y}^{2}=\epsilon\tilde{\beta}\ll\hat{\sigma}_{x}^{2}\). For a maximum field of \(1.8\,\mathrm{T}\) the bending radius and angle \(\frac{1}{\rho}=0.0108\,\mathrm{m}^{-1}\) and \(\psi_{\mathrm{b}}=\frac{0.8L}{\rho}\), respectively with the total number of cells \(n_{\mathrm{c}}=2\pi/\left(2\psi_{\mathrm{b}}\right)\). The focal length of a half quadrupole is \(f=\kappa L=\sqrt{2}L\) and \(k^{-1}=\sqrt{2}L\ell_{\mathrm{q}}=0.05\sqrt{2}L^{2}\) assuming that the total quadrupole length is \(10\,\%\) of \(L\). Numerically, we get \(10^{4}R^{2}=0.2L+0.0292L^{2}=9\) and solving for half the cell length \(L=14.463\) m. The bending field is \(1.8\,\mathrm{T}\) and therefore within practical limits, the quadrupole gradient is \(g=\frac{kE}{0.3}=11.268\,\mathrm{T}/\mathrm{m}\) and the pole tip field is \(B_{\mathrm{t}}=gR=11.268\cdot 0.03=0.338\,\mathrm{T}\), which is well within practical limits of about \(1\,\mathrm{T}\). The number of FODO cells is \(n_{\mathrm{c}}=\pi/\psi_{\mathrm{b}}=25.141\) and to make it an even number of cell, say 26, we may decrease the bending magnet field by a factor \(25.141/26\) to \(1.740\,\mathrm{T}\). Now the tunes are \(Q_{x,y}=6.25\) or right on a destructive half integer resonance. By raising the quadrupole strengths, we increase the tunes to say \(Q_{x,y}=6.75\). The new quadrupole strengths are from \(\sin\psi=\frac{1}{\kappa}=0.72815\) from which we get the new quadrupole strength \(k=0.06962\,\mathrm{m}^{-2}\) and gradient \(g=11.603\,\mathrm{T}/\mathrm{m}\) which is still within practical limits.

The transformation matrix of an unperturbed FOFO cell is \(\mathcal{M}_{0}=\left(\begin{matrix}\cos\psi_{0}&\beta_{0}\sin\psi_{0}\\ -\frac{1}{\beta_{0}}\sin\psi_{0}&\cos\psi_{0}\end{matrix}\right)\) and for \(n_{\mathrm{c}}\) cells forming a half ring with \(\Psi_{0}=n_{\mathrm{c}}\psi_{0}\) the transformation matrix is \(\mathcal{M}_{0n}=\mathcal{M}_{0}^{n_{\mathrm{c}}}=\left(\begin{matrix}\cos \Psi_{0}&\beta_{0}\sin\Psi_{0}\\ -\frac{1}{\beta_{0}}\sin\Psi_{0}&\cos\Psi_{0}\end{matrix}\right)\). Inserting a drift space of length \(\ell\) at the beginning and end of the half ring results in a newtransformation matrix with

\[\mathcal{M}_{n} =\left(\begin{array}{cc}1&\ell\\ 0&1\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{cc}\cos\Psi_{0}&\beta_{0}\sin\Psi_{ 0}\\ -\frac{1}{\beta_{0}}\sin\Psi_{0}&\cos\Psi_{0}\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array} []{cc}1&\ell\\ 0&1\end{array}\right)\] \[=\left(\begin{array}{cc}\cos\Psi_{0}-\frac{\ell}{\beta_{0}} \sin\Psi_{0}&\beta_{0}\sin\Psi_{0}+2\ell\cos\Psi_{0}-\frac{\ell^{2}}{\beta_{0} }\sin\Psi_{0}\\ -\frac{1}{\beta_{0}}\sin\Psi_{0}&\cos\Psi_{0}-\frac{\ell}{\beta_{0}}\sin\Psi_{ 0}\end{array}\right).\]

This must be equal to a new symmetric matrix \(\mathcal{M}_{n}=\left(\begin{array}{cc}\cos\Psi&\beta\sin\Psi\\ -\frac{1}{\beta}\sin\Psi&\cos\Psi\end{array}\right)\) and equating matrix elements on both sides we can solve for the new phase \(\Psi\) and betatron function \(\beta\). The tune change is \(\Delta Q=\left(\Psi-\Psi_{0}\right)/\pi\) which we get from the equality \(\cos\Psi=\cos\Psi_{0}-\frac{\ell}{\beta_{0}}\sin\Psi_{0}\) and the change of the betatron function is \(\left(\beta-\beta_{0}\right)\approx\beta_{0}\frac{\sin\Psi_{0}-\sin\Psi}{\sin \Psi}\). Since \(\eta^{\prime}=0\) at the insertion point, we don't find a change in the \(\eta\)-function by inserting a drift space.

**10.4**: For \(\alpha_{1}=\alpha_{2}=0\) the transformation matrix of an arbitrary matching section is \(\mathcal{M}_{\rm m}=\left(\begin{array}{cc}\sqrt{\frac{\beta_{2}}{\beta_{1} }}\cos\psi&\sqrt{\beta_{1}\beta_{2}}\sin\psi\\ -\frac{1}{\sqrt{\beta_{1}\beta_{2}}}\sin\psi&\sqrt{\frac{\beta_{1}}{\beta_{2} }}\cos\psi\end{array}\right)=\left(\begin{array}{cc}C&S\\ C^{\prime}&S^{\prime}\end{array}\right)\) and the transformation of the betatron function between two symmetry points is \(\beta_{2}=C^{2}\beta_{1}+\frac{1}{\beta_{1}}S^{2}\). Especially simple solutions exist if the phases \(\Delta\psi_{x}=\Delta\psi_{y}=\pi/2\) in which case \(C_{x}=C_{y}=0\) and the sine-like matrix element is adjusted such that \(S^{2}_{x,y}=\beta_{1,x_{y}}\beta_{2,x,y}\). We have made no use of any FODO parameter and therefore the matching works between any two symmetry points where \(\alpha_{1}=\alpha_{2}=0\).

**10.5**: The vertical betatron function is periodic since the vertical focusing is periodic from the quadrupoles. This should be true also for the horizontal betatron function but it is not because of the use of sector bending magnets which contribute to horizontal but not to vertical focusing. The dispersion function is even more perturbed because of the missing bending magnets.

## Solutions for Chap. 11

**11.1**: The oscillation period for \(500\,\mathrm{MHz}\) is \(T_{\rm rf}=\frac{1}{5\cdot 10^{6}}=2.0\times 10^{-9}\,\mathrm{s}\). Therefore the bunches are separated by \(2\,\mathrm{ns}\).

**11.2**: First we note that \(J_{\rm s}=2\) for rectangular magnets and the synchrotron oscillation damping time is from (11.30) \(\tau_{\rm s}^{-1}=\frac{2}{3}r_{\rm e}c\gamma^{3}\left(\frac{1}{\rho^{2}} \right)=1139.6\,\mathrm{s}^{-1}\) or \(\tau_{\rm s}=0.877\,\mathrm{ms}\). On the other hand, the energy loss per turn is \(U\left(\mathrm{GeV}\right)=7.1685\times 10^{-4}\,\mathrm{GeV}\) or \(0.023895\,\%\) of the particles energy. At this rate the particle radiates all its energy away in 4,185 turns. To orbit one turn it takes the particle \(0.2096\,\mathrm{\SIUnitSymbolMicro s}\) or to radiate away all its energy \(0.877\,\mathrm{ms}\). In other words, the synchrotron damping time is just as long as it takes the particle to radiate away all its energy at the initial energy rate.

### Solutions for Chap. 12

We use the coordinates \(\left(\psi,\,\Delta cp/cp_{0}\right)\) for which the changes per unit time are \(\dot{\psi}=-h\omega_{0}\eta_{\rm c}\left(\frac{\Delta cp}{cp_{0}}\right)\) (\(h\) harmonic number, \(\omega_{0}\) revolution frequency) and \(\frac{{\rm d}}{{\rm d}t}\left(\frac{\Delta cp}{cp_{0}}\right)=\frac{eV_{\rm rf }(\psi)-U(E)}{cp_{0}T_{0}}\) with \(V_{\rm rf}\left(\psi\right)\) the rf-voltage at the phase \(\psi\) and \(U\left(E\right)\) the energy loss per turn at energy \(E\). Expanding we get \(eV_{\rm rf}\left(\psi\right)-U\left(E\right)\approx e\left.\frac{{\rm d}V_{ \rm rf}}{{\rm d}\psi}\right|_{\psi_{\rm s}}\varphi-4U\left(E_{0}\right)\beta^{ 2}\frac{{\rm d}cp}{cp_{0}}\) where \(\varphi\) is the phase deviation from the synchronous phase \(\psi_{\rm s}\). The last term gives rise to damping which we ignore here and \(\frac{{\rm d}}{{\rm d}t}\left(\frac{\Delta cp}{cp_{0}}\right)=\frac{1}{cp_{0} T_{0}}e\left.\frac{{\rm d}V_{\rm rf}}{{\rm d}\psi}\right|_{\psi_{\rm s}}\varphi\). Following the discussion leading to the Vlasov equation we scale the coordinates \(\varphi\longrightarrow\sqrt{\frac{cp_{0}T_{0}}{e\,{\rm d}V_{\rm rf}/{\rm d} \psi}|_{\psi_{\rm s}}}\varphi\) and \(\frac{\Delta cp}{cp_{0}}\longrightarrow\sqrt{\frac{1}{-h\omega_{0}\eta_{\rm c }}}\frac{\Delta cp}{cp_{0}}\) to get \(\sqrt{\frac{cp_{0}T_{0}}{e\,{\rm d}V_{\rm rf}/{\rm d}\psi}|_{\psi_{\rm s}}} \dot{\varphi}=-h\omega_{0}\eta_{\rm c}\sqrt{\frac{1}{-h\omega_{0}\eta_{\rm c }}}\frac{\Delta cp}{cp_{0}}\) or \(\dot{\varphi}=\omega_{0}\sqrt{-\frac{h\eta_{\rm c}}{2\pi cp_{0}}e\left.\frac{{ \rm d}V_{\rm rf}}{{\rm d}\psi}\right|_{\psi_{\rm s}}\frac{\Delta cp}{cp_{0}}}\) and \(\frac{{\rm d}}{{\rm d}t}\left(\frac{\Delta cp}{cp_{0}}\right)=\omega_{0}\sqrt{- \frac{h\eta_{\rm c}}{2\pi cp_{0}}e\left.\frac{{\rm d}V_{\rm rf}}{{\rm d}\psi} \right|_{\psi_{\rm s}}}\varphi\). The synchrotron oscillation frequency is then just the coefficient to the coordinates \(\Omega_{\rm s}=\omega_{0}\sqrt{-\frac{h\eta_{\rm c}}{2\pi cp_{0}}e\left.\frac {{\rm d}V_{\rm rf}}{{\rm d}\psi}\right|_{\psi_{\rm s}}}\). To make the synchrotron oscillation frequency zero we would need a second rf-system adjusted such that \(\left.\frac{{\rm d}V_{\rm rf}}{{\rm d}\psi}\right|_{\psi_{\rm s}}=0\). For simplicity of discussion we assume sinusoidal rf-voltages and an additional rf-system at twice the frequency of the first. For maximum efficiency, we phase the second rf-system such that \(\psi_{2}=0\) at the synchronous phase of the first system. The conditions are then \(V_{\rm rf}\sin\psi_{\rm s}=V_{1}\sin\psi_{\rm s}\) and \(V_{\rm rf}\cos\psi_{\rm s}=V_{1}\cos\psi_{\rm s}+V_{2}=0\) from which we can isolate the voltages to be \(V_{1}=V_{\rm rf}\) and \(V_{2}=V_{\rm rf}\cos\psi_{\rm s}\).

The equilibrium bunch length is given by (11.48) and is with \(\left.\frac{{\rm d}V_{\rm rf}}{{\rm d}\psi}\right|_{\psi_{\rm s}}=\hat{V}\cos \psi_{\rm s}\) for this problem \(\sigma_{\ell}=\frac{\sqrt{2\pi}c}{\omega_{0}}\sqrt{\frac{\eta_{\rm c}E_{0}}{ he\,{\rm d}V_{\rm rf}/{\rm d}\psi}|_{\psi_{\rm s}}}\frac{\sigma_{E}}{E_{0}}\). The bunch length can be manipulated by adjusting the relative phase and voltages of both rf-systems. In general, for a two frequency rf-system the combined voltage is \(V_{\rm rf}=V_{1}\sin\omega_{1}t+V_{2}\sin\left(\omega_{2}t+\delta\right)\), where \(\delta\) is the phase shift between both systems and \(\left.\frac{{\rm d}V_{\rm rf}}{{\rm d}\psi}\right|_{\psi_{\rm s}}=V_{1}\cos \omega_{1}t+V_{2}\cos\left(\omega_{2}t+\delta\right)\) with the synchronous time \(t_{\rm s}=\psi_{\rm s}/\omega_{1}\).

An external field acts the same on all particles in a beam. If the beam as a whole performs coherent transverse or longitudinal oscillations, we may consider the situation being just one macroparticle. One could consider an external field which does depend on the amplitude of the macroparticle and this field would then damp the coherent oscillations because \(\partial f/\partial w\neq 0\). This is the case for a feedback system to damp coherent oscillations within a beam. The beam position is measured at one point and the signal acts back on the beam after some amplification. If the feedback system is fast enough it works for slices of a bunch where the slice charge is offset from the equilibrium. This is exploited in stochastic cooling to reduce the beam emittance. However, damping of incoherent oscillations, as we get from the emission of synchrotron radiation, is not possible by external fields. Here each individual particle has a different coordinate but the external field is the same for all particles.

**12.4** We use (12.106) and note that for a stationary solution \(\alpha_{n}=0\) for all \(n\). The remaining coefficients depend only on \(\alpha_{w}/D\) or parameters that are determined by the storage ring containing the beam. This makes the Gaussian distribution of the injected beam irrelevant.

**12.5** The beam lifetime without quantum effects is \(21.4\,\mathrm{h}\) and we allow this lifetime to be reduced by \(10\,\%\). The quantum lifetime for all three degrees of freedom therefore should be longer than \(\tau_{\mathrm{q}}=577.8\,\mathrm{h}\). Quantum effect lifetime is given by (12.132) where \(2x\) is the aperture in Gaussian standard units. The vertical damping time is \(\frac{1}{\tau_{y}}=\frac{\left\langle P_{y}\right\rangle}{2E}\). The synchrotron radiation power is \(\left\langle P_{y}\right\rangle=1,155\,\mathrm{GeV/s}\) and the vertical damping time \(\tau_{y}=2.60\,\mathrm{ms}\). The aperture factor is then \(\frac{\mathrm{e}^{x}}{x}=2\frac{\tau_{\mathrm{q}}}{\tau_{y}}=4.4\times 10^{5}\) which can be solved for \(x\approx 15.75\) or for \(\frac{A}{\sigma}=5.6\). The vertical aperture should therefore be at least 5-6 times the Gaussian standard height. The same is true for the other two degrees of freedom. The damping times may be slightly different which makes little difference on the number of "sigma's" because of the fast variation of the exponential function. To cover all three degrees of freedom it is common to use 7-10 Gaussian standard units.

## Solutions for Chap. 13

**13.1** The damping characteristics are determined by the partition numbers and the \(\vartheta\)-parameter. Horizontal motion becomes antidamped when \(\vartheta=\frac{\oint\kappa^{2}\eta\left(1+2\rho^{2}\dot{k}\right)\mathrm{d}z} {\oint\kappa^{2}\mathrm{d}z}\geq 1\). We evaluate this integral in thin lens approximation for only one half cell, since all others are the same and assume that \(k_{\mathrm{QF}}=-k_{\mathrm{QD}}=k\) and \(\ell_{\mathrm{QF}}=\ell_{\mathrm{QD}}=\ell\). Then \(\vartheta=\kappa\left(\hat{\eta}+\tilde{\eta}\right)+2\rho\left(\hat{\eta}- \tilde{\eta}\right)k\). Furthermore \(\hat{\eta}+\tilde{\eta}=\kappa L\frac{2}{\dot{k}\ell}\) and \(\left(\hat{\eta}-\tilde{\eta}\right)k=\kappa\frac{L}{\dot{\ell}}\). With this the \(\vartheta\)-parameter is finally \(\vartheta=2\frac{L}{\dot{\ell}}\left(\frac{\kappa^{2}}{k}+1\right).\) It follows from \(\ell\ll L\) that \(\vartheta>1\) and that the horizontal betatron function is antidamped. It is only because of adiabatic damping during acceleration that the beam does not blow up. If the acceleration is too slow the beam emittance will grow.

## Solutions for Chap. 14

For \(\left\langle\frac{\mathcal{H}_{\mathrm{c}}}{\left|\rho^{3}\right|}\right\rangle= \frac{1}{\mathcal{C}}\int_{0}^{C}\frac{\mathcal{H}\left(z\right)}{\left|\rho^{ 3}\right|}\mathrm{d}z\) where \(\left\langle\mathcal{H}\left(z\right)\right\rangle=\left\langle\beta\eta^{ \prime 2}\right\rangle+\left\langle 2\alpha\eta\eta^{\prime}\right\rangle+\left\langle \gamma\eta^{2}\right\rangle\) we need to formulate an analytical expression. Since all bending magnets contribute similarly, only one has to be evaluated. We estimate the average values from known solutions in the middle of FODO-cell quadrupoles (10.3), (10.74), and (10.5). Transforming through the QF \(\eta_{\mathrm{QF}}^{\prime}=-\hat{\eta}/f\), \(\eta_{\mathrm{QD}}^{\prime}=-\ddot{\eta}/f\) and \(\left\langle\beta\eta^{\prime 2}\right\rangle\approx\frac{1}{2}\left(\hat{ \beta}\eta_{\mathrm{QF}}^{\prime 2}+\ddot{\beta}\eta_{\mathrm{QD}}^{\prime 2} \right)=\frac{L^{3}}{\rho^{2}}\frac{4\kappa^{2}+5}{4\sqrt{\kappa^{2}-1}}\). For \(\left\langle 2\alpha\eta\eta^{\prime}\right\rangle\) we approximate \(\left\langle\eta\right\rangle\approx\frac{\hat{\eta}+\ddot{\eta}}{2}=\frac{L^ {2}\kappa^{2}}{\rho}\), \(\left\langle\eta^{\prime}\right\rangle\approx\frac{\hat{\eta}-\ddot{\eta}}{L}= \frac{L\kappa}{\rho}\) and with \(\alpha=-\frac{1}{2}\beta^{\prime}\approx-\frac{1}{2}\frac{\hat{\beta}-\ddot{ \beta}}{L}\) we get for the second term \(\left\langle 2\alpha\eta\eta^{\prime}\right\rangle=-\frac{L^{3}}{\rho^{2}}\frac{ \kappa^{4}\left(4\kappa^{2}+5\right)}{2\sqrt{\kappa^{2}-1}}\). Finally, we note that \(\gamma\left(z\right)\) is constant in a drift space (bending magnet) and is from matrix transformation at the exit of QF \(\gamma_{\mathrm{QF}}=\frac{1}{\kappa^{2}L^{2}}\hat{\beta}=\mathrm{const}\). With this \(\left\langle\gamma\eta^{2}\right\rangle\approx\left(\frac{1}{\kappa^{2}L^{2}} \hat{\beta}+\frac{1}{\hat{\beta}}\right)\frac{\ddot{\eta}^{2}+\ddot{\eta}^{2}} {2}=\frac{L^{3}}{\rho^{2}}\frac{\kappa^{2}\left(4\kappa^{2}+5\right)}{2\sqrt {\kappa^{2}-1}}\). Collecting all terms \(\left\langle\mathcal{H}\left(z\right)\right\rangle\approx\frac{L^{3}}{\rho^{2 }}\frac{\kappa^{2}\left(4\kappa^{2}-3\right)}{4\sqrt{\kappa^{2}-1}}\) and the minimum is reached from \(\partial\mathcal{H}/\partial\kappa=0\) for \(\kappa\approx 1.071\). The associated FODO phase advance per cell is \(\psi\approx 138^{\circ}\).

We use an energy of \(E=2\,\mathrm{GeV}\) and an optimized \(90^{\circ}\) lattice for which from Fig. 14.5\(\left\langle\mathcal{H}\right\rangle/\left(\rho\Theta^{3}\right)\approx 3\). We also assume that only \(75\,\%\) of the ring is occupied by bending magnets and therefore \(\ell_{\mathrm{b}}/\ell_{\mathrm{b},0}=0.75\). Solving (14.25) for the minimum bending angle \(\Theta\) per bending magnet we get \(\Theta=\frac{\epsilon_{\mathrm{s}}}{\mathcal{C}_{\mathrm{q}}\gamma^{2}}\frac{ 1}{\left\langle\mathcal{H}\right\rangle/\left(\rho\Theta^{3}\right)}\frac{\ell _{\mathrm{b}}}{\ell_{\mathrm{b},0}}\frac{180}{\pi}=3.845^{\circ}\). To compose a ring, we need at least 94 bending magnets or quadrupoles to reach a minimum beam emittance of \(\epsilon_{x}=5\times 10^{-9}\) m.

## Solutions for Chap. 15

We use the perturbation \(P_{22}\left(z\right)=\frac{1}{2}v_{0}^{2}\beta^{5/2}mw_{\beta}^{2}\) in the equation of motion \(\ddot{w}_{\beta}+v_{0}^{2}w_{\beta}=\frac{1}{2}v_{0}^{2}\beta^{5/2}mw_{\beta}^ {2}\) and get after reordering the equation \(\ddot{w}_{\beta}+v_{0}^{2}\left(1-\frac{1}{2}\beta^{5/2}mw_{\beta}\right)w_{ \beta}=0\). On average, the sextupoles do not contribute in linear approximation to a tune shift because \(\left(\frac{1}{2}\beta^{5/2}mw_{\beta}\right)=0\). In higher order, however there is some tune shift which we can expect from the fact that the contribution to the tune shift is greater while \(w_{\beta}>0\) compared to the case when \(w_{\beta}<0\). The \(P_{21}\left(z\right)\)-term contributes to a tune shift because a beam passing on a distorted orbit \(w_{\mathrm{c}}\) through a sextupole feels a quadrupole field component and therefore a tune shift. The equation of motion shows this directly \(\ddot{w}_{\beta}+v_{0}^{2}\left(1-\frac{1}{2}\beta^{5/2}mw_{\mathrm{c}}\right)w _{\beta}=0\) and the tune shift is \(\delta v\approx\frac{1}{4}v_{0}\left(\beta^{5/2}mw_{\mathrm{c}}\right)\).

At the bending magnet exit the dispersion is \(D=\rho\left(1-\cos\frac{\ell_{\mathrm{b}}}{\rho}\right)\) and the slope \(D^{\prime}=\sin\frac{\ell_{\mathrm{b}}}{\rho}\). Extrapolating linearly back, we expect the dispersion to start with a slope of \(D^{\prime}\) at a distance \(s\) before the bending magnet exit. Therefore,\(\rho\left(1-\cos\frac{\ell_{\rm b}}{\rho}\right)\) and using \(\frac{\ell_{\rm b}}{\rho}\ll 1\) we get \(s\approx\frac{1}{2}\ell_{\rm b}\) demonstrating that the dispersion function seems to start in the middle of the bending magnet.

**15.3** With errors \(\Delta\frac{1}{\rho}\ell=\theta\) and \(A=\frac{\sqrt{\beta\left(z\right)}}{2\sin\pi v}\) the vertical \(\eta\)-function is \(\eta\left(z\right)=A\oint\Delta\frac{1}{\rho}\sqrt{\beta\left(\overline{z} \right)}\cos v\left[\varphi\left(z\right)-\varphi\left(\overline{z}\right)+ \pi\right]\mathrm{d}\overline{z}\quad=\quad A\sum_{i}\sqrt{\beta_{i}}\theta_{i }\cos v\left[\varphi\left(z\right)-\varphi_{i}+\pi\right]\) where we have omitted the index \({}_{y}\). The expectation value for the dispersion function is for \(N\) statistically distributed errors \(\left\langle\eta^{2}\right\rangle=A^{2}\sum_{i}\beta_{i}\theta_{i}^{2}\cos^{2 }v\pi=\frac{1}{4}\beta\left(z\right)N\bar{\beta}\sigma_{\theta}^{2}\cot v\pi\) where \(\sigma_{\theta}=\sqrt{\left\langle\theta^{2}\right\rangle}\) is the rms deflection angle due to misalignment errors and \(\bar{\beta}\) the average value of the betatron function at the location of errors. For random quadrupole misalignment errors \(\sigma_{x}\) and \(\ell\) the length of the quadrupole \(\sigma_{\theta}=k\ell\sigma_{x}\) and for bending magnet rotational errors \(\sigma_{\alpha}\) the rms errors are \(\sigma_{\theta}=\frac{\ell}{\rho}\sigma_{\alpha}\). Use numerical values from lattice #3 in Table 10.1 to estimate the actual expectation value of the vertical dispersion function.

**15.4** The transformation \(\mathcal{M}\) through both bending magnets and the drift space \(L\) between them is with \(D=\rho\left(1-\cos\theta\right)\)

\[\mathcal{M} = \left(\begin{array}{ccc}1&L+2\ell&-\left(L+\ell\right)\sin \theta\\ 0&1&\sin\theta\\ 0&0&1\end{array}\right)\] \[= \left(\begin{array}{ccc}1&\ell&D\\ 0&1&\sin\theta\\ 0&0&1\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{ccc}1&L&0\\ 0&1&0\\ 0&0&1\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{ccc}1&\ell&-D\\ 0&1&-\sin\theta\\ 0&0&1\end{array}\right).\]

From this, we get the dispersion at the end of the second bending magnet \(D=-\left(L+\ell\right)\sin\theta=-d\) and \(D^{\prime}=0\).

**15.5** The tune change due to quadrupole field errors is \(\Delta v=\frac{1}{4\pi}\sum_{i}\beta_{i}\left(\Delta k_{i}\ell\right)\) and with \(\sigma_{k}=\sqrt{\left\langle\left(\Delta k_{i}\ell\right)^{2}\right\rangle}\) the expectation value is \(\sigma_{v}=\frac{1}{4\pi}N_{\rm q}\bar{\beta}\sigma_{k}\). To have a \(96\,\%\) probability to avoid an integer or half integer resonance \(2\sigma_{v}\) should be less than \(0.25\) or \(\sigma_{v,{\rm q}}<0.125\). With numerical values \(N_{\rm q}\) and \(\bar{\beta}\) one can solve for the rms quadrupole field tolerance \(\sigma_{k}\). Manufacturing tolerances resulting in non-parallelism of bending magnet poles cause gradient field errors as well. If the angle between pole surfaces is \(\alpha\) then the field will be \(B\left(x\right)\approx\frac{B_{0}G_{0}}{G_{0}+ax}\approx B_{0}G_{0}\left(1+ \frac{\alpha}{G_{0}}x\right)\). From this, we extract the gradient field error \(\delta k=-\frac{1}{\rho}\frac{\alpha}{G_{0}}\) and get the rms tune shift \(\sigma_{v,{\rm b}}=\frac{1}{4\pi}N_{\rm b}\bar{\beta}_{\rm b}\frac{\ell}{ \rho G_{0}}\sigma_{\alpha}\), where \(G_{0}\) is the nominal gap between magnet poles, \(\ell/\rho\) is the bending angle, \(N_{\rm b}\) the number of magnets and \(\bar{\beta}_{\rm b}\) the average value of the betatron function in the bending magnets. The total allowable tune shift is then \(\sigma_{v}=\sqrt{\sigma_{v,{\rm q}}^{2}+\sigma_{v,{\rm b}}^{2}}<0.125\) determining the gradient field and parallelism tolerances.

## Solutions for Chap. 16

**16.1** We use an energy \(E\), a FODO half cell length \(L\) and a bending fill factor of \(50\,\%\) or \(\ell_{\rm b}=L/2\). We assume that there are \(N=21\) FODO cells. The natural chromaticities are in both planes from (15.105) \(\Delta\xi_{x,y}=-\frac{1}{2\pi}\) per FODO half-cell and the sextupole strengths are \(m_{\rm SF}\ell_{\rm s}=\frac{\Delta\xi}{\hat{\eta}\left(\hat{\beta}-\hat{ \beta}\right)}\) and \(m_{\rm SD}\ell_{\rm s}=\frac{\Delta\xi}{\hat{\eta}\left(\hat{\beta}-\hat{\beta }\right)}\). The phase differences between similar sextupoles (SFs or SDs) are \(\Delta\varphi=2\pi/N\). The stop-band width \(\Delta v_{\rm stop}^{(3)}=-\frac{v_{x,0}}{4\pi}\,\frac{x_{0}}{\sqrt{\beta_{0}}} \left|\int_{0}^{2\pi}\beta_{x}^{5/2}m{\rm e}^{{\rm i}3v_{x0}\varphi}{\rm d}\varphi\right|\) becomes with \(v_{x,0}\beta_{x}{\rm d}\varphi=\)dz and replacing the integral with sums over all SFs and SDs \(\Delta v_{\rm stop}^{(3)}\)=\(\frac{-x_{0}}{4\pi\sqrt{\beta_{0}}}\left|\sum_{k=0}^{N-1}\left(\left.\beta_{x}^{5/2}m \ell_{\rm s}\right|_{\rm SF}{\rm e}^{{\rm i}3v_{x0}k\Delta\varphi}\right.+\left. \beta_{x}^{5/2}m\ell_{\rm s}\right|_{\rm SD}{\rm e}^{{\rm i}3v_{x0}(k+1/2) \Delta\varphi}\right)\right|\). The sums become \(\sum\limits_{k=0}^{N-1}e^{{\rm i}3v_{x0}k\Delta\varphi}=\frac{\exp({\rm i}6 \pi\,v_{x0})}{\exp({\rm i}6\pi\,v_{x0}/N)-1}\) and \(\exp({\rm i}\frac{3v_{x0}}{2N}\Delta\varphi)\sum\limits_{k=0}^{N-1}\exp\left({ \rm i}3v_{x0}k\Delta\varphi\right)=\exp\left({\rm i}\frac{3\pi\,v_{x0}}{N^{2} }\right)\frac{\exp({\rm i}6\pi\,v_{x0})-1}{\exp({\rm i}6\pi\,v_{x0}/N)-1}\). Finally, the stop band width is \(\Delta v_{\rm stop}^{(3)}=\frac{-x_{0}\Delta\xi}{4\pi\sqrt{\beta_{0}}}\left| \left[\frac{\hat{\beta}^{3/2}}{\hat{\eta}\left(\hat{\beta}-\hat{\beta}\right) }-\hat{\beta}\right)\frac{\hat{\beta}^{3/2}}{\hat{\eta}\left(\hat{\beta}- \hat{\beta}\right)}\left[\left.\frac{3\pi\,v_{x0}}{N^{2}}\right)\right]\frac{ \exp({\rm i}6\pi\,v_{x0})-1}{\exp({\rm i}6\pi\,v_{x0}/N)-1}\bigg{|}\). Close to the third order resonance (\(v_{x0}\approx 3+\delta v\)) we set \(\exp\left({\rm i}\frac{3\pi\,v_{x0}}{N^{2}}\right)\approx\exp\left({\rm i} \frac{9\pi}{N^{2}}\right)\) and \(\frac{\exp({\rm i}6\pi\,v_{x0})-1}{\exp({\rm i}6\pi\,v_{x0}/N)-1}\approx\frac {16\pi\delta v}{\exp({\rm i}18\pi/N)-1}\) and get \(\Delta v_{\rm stop}^{(3)}\propto x_{0}\delta v\). For finite betatron amplitudes \(x_{0}\) the stop band width scales like the tune distance \(\delta v\) from the third order resonance.

**16.2** In the definition (16.33) we notice that \(|m|\leq n\) and therefore there are odd values for \(m\) if \(m\) is even and vice versa. That means for \(n\) even there can be a value \(m=0\) while for an odd \(n\) we have \(m\neq 0\). Only terms \(c_{nm}=c_{n0}\neq 0\) give rise to a tune shift in this approximation which is the case for even values of \(n\) only.

**16.3** We write (16.33) like \(\cos^{n}\psi=c_{n0}+c_{n1}{\rm e}^{{\rm i}\psi}+c_{n2}{\rm e}^{{\rm i}2\psi}+ \ldots+c_{nn}{\rm e}^{{\rm i}n\psi}\). on the other hand \(\cos^{n}\psi=\frac{1}{2^{n}}\left({\rm e}^{{\rm i}\psi}+{\rm e}^{-{\rm i}\psi} \right)^{n}=\frac{1}{2^{n}}\left({\rm e}^{{\rm i}n\psi}+a{\rm e}^{{\rm i}(n-1) \psi}+\ldots\right)\). In both equations there is only one term \({\rm e}^{{\rm i}n\psi}\). Therefore \(c_{nn}{\rm e}^{{\rm i}n\psi}=\frac{1}{2^{n}}{\rm e}^{{\rm i}n\psi}\) and \(c_{nn}=\frac{1}{2^{n}}\).

## Solutions for Chap. 17

**17.1** First, we find from (6.95) all second order terms in \(\delta\). The term \(-\kappa\delta^{2}\) together with \(C\left(\zeta\right)=\cos\left(\zeta/\rho\right)\) and \(S(\zeta)=\rho\cos\left(\zeta/\rho\right)\) the perturbation \(P\left(z,\delta\right)=-\delta^{2}\int\kappa_{x}\left|S\left(z\right)C^{ \prime}\left(\zeta\right)-C\left(z\right)S^{\prime}\left(\zeta\right)\right|=- \delta^{2}\rho\left(1-\cos z/\rho\right)\). Since no slopes are involved, \(T_{166}=c_{166}=-\rho\left(1-\cos z/\rho\right)\). We could have guessed this result, since the perturbation term is the same as for the dispersion except for a factor \(-\delta\). This second order term is therefore just the second order chromatic perturbation.

**17.2**: From (6.95) we collect quadratic terms and with \(x=Cx_{0}\) and \(x^{\prime}=C^{\prime}x_{0}\) we get the desired perturbation \(p\left(\zeta|x_{0}^{2}\right)=\left[\left(-\frac{m}{2}-\kappa_{x}^{3}-2\kappa_{ x}k\right)C^{2}+\frac{\kappa_{x}}{2}C^{\prime 2}\right]x_{0}^{2}\). Note, that we ignore the \(\kappa^{\prime}\)-term since we exclude non-constant strength parameters. With this perturbation, the integral (5.75)

\[T_{111} = \int_{0}^{z}p\left(\zeta|x_{0}^{2}\right)\left[S\left(z\right)C^{ \prime}\left(\zeta\right)-C\left(z\right)S^{\prime}\left(\zeta\right)\right]d\zeta\] \[= \left(-\frac{1}{2}m-\kappa_{x}^{3}-2\kappa_{x}k\right)\frac{1}{3k }\left[kS^{2}+\left(1-C\right)\right]+\frac{5}{6}\left[2\left(1-C\right)-kS^ {2}\right]\]

where \(C,S\) are the principal solutions of linear beam dynamics.

**17.3**: We consider a ring made of a total of \(N_{c}=61\) FODO-cells, each with a phase advance of \(90^{\circ}\) and the tune is then \(v=15.25\). This ring has 61 QFs and 61 QDs. The betatron functions in the middle of the quadrupoles are \(\beta=L\left(2\pm\sqrt{2}\right)\) and the \(\eta\)-function \(\eta=\frac{L^{2}}{2\rho}\left(4\pm\sqrt{2}\right)\). The natural chromaticity \(\xi_{0,x,y}=-\frac{N_{c}}{\pi}\) and the change in chromaticity due to sextupoles

\[\Delta\xi_{x,y} = \frac{N_{\rm c}}{4\pi}\left[\left(\beta\eta m\ell_{\rm s}\right)_ {\rm QF}\pm\left(\beta\eta m\ell_{\rm s}\right)_{\rm QD}\right]\] \[= \frac{N_{\rm c}}{4\pi}\frac{L^{3}}{2\rho}\left[\pm\left(10+6\sqrt{ 2}\right)m_{\rm QF}\ell_{\rm s}\pm\left(10-6\sqrt{2}\right)m_{\rm QD}\ell_{ \rm s}\right]=\mp\xi_{x,y}.\]

After evaluation \(\Delta\dot{\xi}_{x}=18.485m_{\rm QF}\ell_{\rm s}+1.515m_{\rm QD}\ell_{\rm s}= \frac{8\rho}{L^{3}}\) and \(\Delta\dot{\xi}_{y}=-1.515m_{\rm QF}\ell_{\rm s}-18.4851m_{\rm QD}\ell_{\rm s}= \frac{8\rho}{L^{3}}\), which can be solved for the two sextupole families \(m_{\rm QF}\ell_{\rm s}=-m_{\rm QD}\ell_{\rm s}=\frac{2\rho}{3\sqrt{2}L^{3}}\). We use this result for (17.45) and get \(\sum_{i}m_{i}\ell_{i}\beta^{3/2}\exp\left({\rm i}\psi_{xi}\right)=\left|m\ell_ {s}\beta^{3/2}\right|_{\rm QF}-\left|m\ell_{s}\beta^{3/2}\right|_{\rm QD}\exp \left({\rm i}\pi/4\right)\neq 0\) because of cancellations within every four cells. Only the contribution of the last cell is uncompensated. If we place non-interleaved sextupoles in pairs \(180^{\circ}\) apart there is total cancellation and the driving term is zero.

**17.4**: The tunes of the ring are in both planes \(v=15.25\). Equations (17.45)-(17.49) exhibit mainly integer and third order resonances. A proper choice on the tunes can minimize these aberration terms. A tune of 15.25 is close to a multiple of 3 and therefore efficient at driving a third order resonance. A better tune would be say 16.25.16.75 or 17.25. One could argue that 16.75 or 17.25 might give the lowest driving terms, although this ignores the variation of sextupole strengths and betatron functions. To find the minimum driving terms (17.45)-(17.49) must be evaluated.

## Solutions for Chap. 18

**18.1** The longest wavelength belong to the lowest TM and TE-mode. The lowest TM-mode is TM\({}_{01}\). We use (18.44) with \(B_{z}=0\) and note that \(E_{r}\) meets the boundary condition by definition, \(E_{\varphi}=0\) at the walls because \(m=0\) and \(E_{z}=0\) at the wall for \(J_{0}\left(k_{\mathrm{c}}R\right)=0\) or \(\lambda_{\mathrm{c}}=\frac{2\pi R}{2.405}\). The longest TM-mode wavelength that could propagate in this tube is about 30 % bigger than the diameter of the tube. The TE-mode fields are given by (18.44) with \(E_{z}=0\). The magnetic field \(B_{z}\varpropto J_{m}\left(k_{\mathrm{c}}R\right)\) just like \(E_{z}\). The radial electric field end normally at the wall, \(E_{\varphi}=0\) for \(J_{0}^{\prime}\left(k_{\mathrm{c}}R\right)=0\) or \(k_{\mathrm{c}}R=1.84\). Solving for the cut-off wavelength \(\lambda_{\mathrm{c}}=\frac{2\pi R}{1.84}\) which is about 30 % smaller than the tube diameter. Therefore, we may conclude that wavelength longer than the tube diameter do not propagate. One big consequence of this is that electron bunches with a bunch length of 1-2 cm or longer do not emit coherent synchrotron radiation because the wavelength would be of the order of the bunch length or vacuum chamber dimensions or longer.

**18.2** A change of temperature would change all linear dimensions of a cavity as determined by the temperature coefficient of the cavity material, in this case copper. The fundamental cavity frequency is inversely proportional to the radial dimension \(a_{1}\) of the cavity (18.48). From \(\frac{\Delta a_{1}}{a_{1}}=-\frac{\Delta f_{\mathrm{ff}}}{f_{\mathrm{rf}}}= \eta\mathrm{r}\,\Delta T\) and \(\Delta f_{\mathrm{ff}}=-16.6\cdot f_{\mathrm{rf}}\,\,\Delta T(\mathrm{{}^{ \circ}C})\). Assuming that the cavity is dimensioned for 500 MHz \(\left|\frac{\Delta f_{\mathrm{ff}}}{f_{\mathrm{rf}}}\right|=\pm 10^{-6}=\mp 16.6 \times 10^{-6}\cdot\Delta T\) and the temperature tolerance is \(\pm 0.06\,\mathrm{{}^{\circ}C}\).

**18.3** The cavity length scales like \(d\varpropto\frac{1}{f_{\mathrm{rf}}}\), the diameter like \(a_{1}\varpropto\frac{1}{f_{\mathrm{rf}}}\), for a pill box cavity the transit time factor is independent of the frequency, the quality factor \(Q\varpropto f_{\mathrm{rf}}^{0}\), the shunt impedance \(R_{\mathrm{s}}\varpropto\frac{1}{\sqrt{f_{\mathrm{rf}}}}\), the specific shunt impedance \(r_{\mathrm{s}}\varpropto\sqrt{f_{\mathrm{rf}}}\) and cavity fill time \(t_{\mathrm{F}}\varpropto\frac{1}{f_{\mathrm{rf}}}\).

**18.4** Such high fields can be sustained only in pulsed linac systems. The wall losses per meter of accelerating structure are from (18.90) \(P_{\mathrm{W}}=5.6\) MW/m. This is too large for financial and technical reasons because it would not be possible to cool that much power from one meter of structure. An electron linac is pulsed with a pulse length of say 2.5 \(\mu s\) and a rep rate of say 100 s\({}^{-1}\). The duty cycle is the 250 \(\mu s\) per second or 2.5 10\({}^{-4}\). The average wall losses are therefore 1.4 kW which is manageable.

**18.5** The capture dynamics in linear accelerators depends on the particle velocity and initial phase at the time it enters the accelerating section. Particles can be accelerated even if the initial field is negative for example in the area 90\({}^{\circ}\) to 180\({}^{\circ}/-180^{\circ}\) to \(-90^{\circ}\). Between 90 and 180\({}^{\circ}\) initially low energy particles travel slower that the rf-wave and quickly fall back into the accelerating phase before they loos all energy. In the accelerating phase they get accelerated very fast and reach high energies. Higher energy particles do not reach equally high final energies because they are faster and will not fall back from the negative acceleration so fast and lose much of their initial energy before they get accelerated again in theaccelerating phase. Particles starting at \(<-90^{\circ}\) will stay longer in the decelerating phase and loose all their energy. After that they get accelerated/decelerated at random. The optimum phase should be \(\psi_{0}=0^{\circ}\) and particles with higher initial relativistic energies gain the highest energy and stay at this phase. Lower energy particles at 1-2 MeV are not relativistic yet and therefore fall back from the crest of the wave gaining less energy. This is the regime of a buncher section where the phase velocity of the rf-wave is reduced to match that of the particles.

We excite the prebuncher to a total effective voltage of \(\hat{V}_{\rm rf}\) and the linear part scales with 3 GHz phase like \(V_{\rm rf}=\hat{V}_{\rm rf}\varphi_{500}\). For simplicity, we assume the electrons to be nonrelativistic and the velocity deviation \(\delta v\) from the \(E_{0}=100\) keV reference particle \(\sqrt{\frac{m}{2E_{0}}}\delta v=\sqrt{\frac{E_{\rm kin}}{E_{0}}}-1=\sqrt{1+ \frac{e\hat{V}_{\rm rf}\varphi_{500}}{E_{0}}}-1\approx\frac{e\hat{V}_{\rm rf} }{2E_{0}}\varphi_{500}\). A distance \(\ell\) downstream from the prebuncher the reference particle arrives at a time \(\tau=\ell/v_{0}=\ell/\sqrt{2E/m}\). During this same time a particle at phase \(\varphi_{500}\) must advance or fall back with respect to the reference particle by the distance \(\frac{\lambda_{\rm rf}}{2\pi}\varphi_{500}\) to arrive at the same time as the reference particle. Therefore, we require \(\tau\delta v=\frac{\lambda_{\rm rf}}{2\pi}\varphi_{500}\) and the shortest bunch length is obtained at a distance \(\ell=\frac{\lambda_{\rm rf}}{2\pi}\frac{2E_{0}}{e\hat{V}_{\rm rf}}\). In this ideal (linear) case the resulting bunch length is zero independent of the original bunch length. In reality, the sinusoidal variation of the prebuncher voltage results in a finite S-like bunch distribution in phase space. We may over-compress the bunch by going slightly beyond the distance \(\ell\) thus getting a slightly higher intensity within a finite phase distance of, for example, \(\pm 12^{\circ}\) at 3 GHz.

The no-load energy gain is \(E_{\rm kin}\left(\rm{MeV}\right)=10.48\sqrt{P_{0}\left(\rm{MW}\right)}=40.6\) MeV and with beam loading this energy gain is reduced by \(\Delta E=-37.47\,i_{\rm b}=-0.75\) MeV. The fill time of one linac section is \(t_{\rm F}=0.73\) us and the rf-pulse remaining for beam acceleration is \(1.77\) us. The beam pulse is therefore \(\tau=1.77\) us long with an energy gain of \(E_{\rm load}=39.85\) MeV. The total beam energy is then \(e_{\rm b}=\left(E_{\rm load}/e\right)\,i_{\rm b}\tau=2.0\) J. On the other hand the total rf-pulse energy is \(e_{\rm rf}=37.5\) J and the linac efficiency is then \(\eta=5.3\) %. If only one pulse is accelerated as is the case for a linear collider or a x-ray laser the total beam energy is \(e_{\rm b}=n_{\rm b}E_{\rm kin}=0.065\) J and the efficiency is \(\eta=0.17\) %.

### Solutions for Chap. 19

The synchrotron radiation energy loss per turn is \(U=93.0\) keV, the beam current is \(I=68.0\) mA and the radiation power \(P_{\rm syn}=6.32\) kW. The energy spread is \(\frac{\sigma_{E}}{E}=0.0727\) % and the required acceptance \(6\frac{\sigma_{E}}{E}=0.436\) % for a beam lifetime of at least one hour. From (9.64) we solve for the function \(F\left(q\right)=1.202\) and \(q=1.902\). Ignoring beam loading the required minimum rf-voltage is \(V_{\rm rf}=qU=176.9\) kV. Including the cavity power \(P_{\rm cy}=1.86\) kW, the total minimum rf-powerneeded is \(P_{\rm tot}=8.18\) kW. Beam loading will change these parameters. From (19.35) the optimum coupling \(\beta_{\rm opt}=4.40\).

**19.2** We express the current in an even Fourier series \(I\left(t\right)=\frac{1}{2}a_{0}+\sum\limits_{n=1}^{\infty}a_{n}\cos\left(not\right)\) and assume only one circulating bunch of charge \(Q\) between \(-\frac{1}{2}\tau\leq t\leq\frac{1}{2}\tau\) where \(\tau\ll T_{0}\) is the revolution time and the average current \(I_{0}=Q/\tau\). The current is \(I\left(t\right)=\sum\limits_{n=-\infty}^{\infty}c_{n}\,{\rm e}^{{\rm i}kaot}=c _{0}+2\sum\limits_{n>0}c_{n}\cos\left(not\right)\). Here \(c_{n}=\frac{1}{I_{0}}\int_{-\frac{1}{2}T_{0}}^{\frac{1}{2}T_{0}}I\left(t \right){\rm e}^{-{\rm i}kaot}{\rm d}t\). After integration \(c_{n}=I_{0}\frac{1}{T_{0}}\frac{2}{-{\rm i}a\omega}\int_{0}^{-{\rm i}a\omega k \frac{1}{2}\tau}{\rm e}^{x}{\rm d}x=I_{0}\frac{1}{T_{0}}\tau=I_{\rm b}\). The coefficient \(a_{n}=2c_{n}=2I_{\rm b}\) for all values of \(n=0,1,2,3\)...

### Solutions for Chap. 20

**20.1** From (20.95) we calculate the coupling from statistical errors to be \(\kappa_{\rm rms}=\sqrt{\left\langle k^{2}\right\rangle}=\frac{1}{2\pi}\left( \delta\underline{k}\,\ell_{\rm q}\right)\sqrt{\overline{\beta_{x}\beta_{y}}N_{ \rm q}}\) where \(\delta\underline{k}\) is the strength of the error, the length of the error is \(\ell\) and \(N_{\rm q}=122\) the number of errors. For \(90^{\circ}\) cells, the quadrupole strength has to be \(k=2/\left(\sqrt{2}L\ell_{\rm q}\right)=\sqrt{2}\) and \(\delta\underline{k}=k\,\delta\alpha\). In the lattice we have \(N_{\rm q}=122\) quadrupoles, for \(90^{\circ}\) cells \(\overline{\beta_{x}\beta_{y}}=2L^{2}\) and the rms coupling is \(\kappa_{\rm rms}=38.8\,\delta\alpha\). In the sample lattice we have equal tunes \(v_{x}=v_{y}\) and therefore the emittance coupling is always \(100\,\%\). To get a finite emittance coupling we must separate the tunes by fine adjustment of the quadrupoles and choose, for example, tunes like \(v_{x}=15.20\) and \(v_{y}=15.15\). The emittance coupling is from (20.117) \(\frac{\epsilon_{y}}{\epsilon_{x}}=\frac{\kappa^{2}}{2\lambda v^{2}+\kappa^{2} }=0.01\). Solving for the coupling, we get \(\kappa\approx 0.005\) which determines the rotational alignment tolerance of the quadrupoles to \(\delta\alpha_{\rm rms}\approx 0.13\,{\rm mrad}\).

**20.2** From the graph we obtain \(v_{\rm I}-v_{x}=\left|v_{\rm II}-v_{y}\right|\approx 0.05\). With this and \(\Delta_{\rm r}=0\) at resonance (20.120) can be solved for the coupling resonance to be \(\kappa\approx 0.1\). The coupling coefficient is just the narrowest distance between the tune measurements.

### Solutions for Chap. 21

**21.1** The beam-beam tune shift is \(\delta v=\frac{1}{4\pi}\beta_{0y}^{*}\Delta\left(k\ell\right)\). We split the ring at the collision point and insert half of the beam-beam focusing on either side of the symmetry point. With the transformation matrix of the unperturbed ring being \(\mathcal{M}_{0}\) we get for the perturbed ring \(\mathcal{M}=\mathcal{PM}_{0}P\), where \(\mathcal{P}=\left(\begin{array}{cc}1&0\\ -\frac{1}{2}\Delta\left(k\ell\right)\ 1\end{array}\right),\)

\[\mathcal{M}_{0} = \left(\begin{array}{cc}\cos 2\pi\,v_{0}&\beta_{0y}^{*}\sin 2\pi\,v_{0}\\ -\frac{1}{\beta_{0y}^{*}}\sin 2\pi\,v_{0}&\cos 2\pi\,v_{0}\end{array}\right),\ {\rm and}\ \mathcal{M} = \left(\begin{array}{cc}\cos 2\pi\,v&\beta_{y}^{*}\sin 2\pi\,v\\ -\frac{1}{\beta_{y}^{*}}\sin 2\pi\,v&\cos 2\pi\,v\end{array}\right).\]Performing the matrix multiplications, we look for the determination of the perturbed betatron function \(\beta_{y}^{*}\) at the collision point only for the terms \(C=\cos 2\pi\,v_{0}-\frac{1}{2}\,\Delta\left(k\ell\right)\beta_{0y}^{*}\sin 2 \pi\,v_{0}\) and \(S=\beta_{0y}^{*}\sin 2\pi\,v_{0}\). The perturbed betatron function is

\(\beta_{y}^{*}=\left(\cos 2\pi\,v_{0}-\frac{1}{2}\,\Delta\left(k\ell\right) \beta_{0y}^{*}\sin 2\pi\,v_{0}\right)^{2}\beta_{0y}^{*}+\left(\beta_{0y}^{*} \sin 2\pi\,v_{0}\right)^{2}\frac{1}{\beta_{0y}^{*}}\) or the linear change of the betatron functions is \(\frac{\Delta\beta_{y}^{*}}{\beta_{0y}^{*}}\approx-2\pi\delta v\sin 2\pi\,v_{0}\).

### Solutions for Chap. 22

**22.1** To calculate the bunch charge we need to calculate the revolution frequency \(f_{0}=1.199\times 10^{6}\,\mathrm{s}^{-1}\). A bunch current of \(I_{\mathrm{b}}=50\,\mathrm{mA}\) resembles therefore a charge of \(Q=41.70\,\mathrm{pC}\). The induced voltage is then for the BPM \(V_{\mathrm{ind}}=2.55\,\mathrm{V}\) and the power into the 50 Ohm terminator is \(P=\frac{V^{2}}{R}=0.130\,\mathrm{W}\). This is very small but so are the BPMs which are very well insulated and continuously heat up. For the bellows these values are \(V_{\mathrm{ind}}=2.552\,\mathrm{V}\) and the power is from (22.20) \(P_{\mathrm{ HOM}}=0.128\,\mathrm{W}\). Again this power is small enough without special cooling. However, this small impedance could only be achieved by shielding the inside of the bellows by smooth strips of flexible metal. An unshielded bellows has a loss factor of about \(k_{\parallel}=50\,\mathrm{V/pC}\). In this case the power would be \(P_{\mathrm{ HOM}}\approx 105\,\mathrm{W}\) which is too much to tolerate in a bellows. With shielding the bellows looks for the beam smooth while pumping is still possible through the small gaps between the metal strips. Similar techniques are now common practice to keep the impedance small in all components of a modern storage rings.

**22.2** From (22.93) we get \(a-\mathrm{i}b=\frac{r+a}{2}-\frac{r-a}{2}-\mathrm{i}2\sqrt{\frac{r^{2}-a^{2}} {4}}=a-\mathrm{i}b\). Furthermore \(\delta^{2}=a\sqrt{\frac{Z_{1}^{2}+Z_{1}^{2}}{n^{2}}}-a\frac{Z_{1}}{n}\) and \(\left(\delta^{2}+a\frac{Z_{1}}{n}\right)^{2}=a^{2}\frac{Z_{1}^{2}+Z_{1}^{2}}{ n^{2}}=\delta^{4}+2\delta^{2}a\frac{Z_{1}}{n}+\left(a\frac{Z_{1}}{n}\right)^{2}\). From this \(a^{2}\frac{Z_{1}^{2}}{n^{2}}=\delta^{4}+2\delta^{2}a\frac{Z_{1}}{n}\) and \(\frac{Z_{1}}{n}=\frac{a}{2\delta^{2}}\frac{Z_{1}^{2}}{n^{2}}-\frac{\delta^{2}} {2a}\) or \(\frac{Z_{1}}{n}=A\frac{Z_{1}^{2}}{n^{2}}-\frac{1}{4A}\,\mathrm{with}\,A=\frac{ a}{2\delta^{2}}\).

### Solutions for Chap. 23

**23.1** The geometry of the field lines in the particle system may be expressed by \(x=\tan\alpha\cdot z\) were \(\alpha\) is the angle between the field line and the \(z\)-axis. In the laboratory system the \(z\)-coordinates are Lorentz contracted and the equation of the field lines becomes \(x^{*}=\frac{\tan\alpha}{\gamma}\cdot z^{*}\).

**23.2** The Cherenkov condition is \(\beta n_{\mathrm{air}}\cos\theta=1\). For electrons \(\beta\left(10\,\mathrm{MeV}\right)=0.99869\) and \(\beta\left(50\,\mathrm{MeV}\right)=0.99995\). The Cherenkov angle for \(10\,\mathrm{MeV}\) electrons is imaginary (\(\cos\theta=1.001\)). In order to preserve energy and momentum, the electron energy must have a minimum energy such that \(n\beta>1\). For \(50\,\mathrm{MeV}\) electronsthis condition is met and the Cherenkov angle is \(\theta_{\rm Ch}=\arccos\left(\frac{1}{0.99995\cdot 1.000277}\right)=1.214^{ \circ}\).

**23.3** The Cherenkov angle is \(\theta_{\rm Ch}=\frac{180}{\pi}\arccos\left(\frac{1}{0.99869\cdot 1.58}\right)=50.673^{ \circ}\). This radiation will meet the other side of the plate at this angle with respect to the surface normal and will be totally reflected, because according to Snell's law \(\left(\frac{\sin\theta_{1}}{\sin\theta_{2}}=\frac{n_{2}}{n_{1}}\right)\) transmission is limited to a maximum angle of \(n_{2}\sin\theta_{2}\) or \(\theta_{2}\leq 36.0^{\circ}\). The radiation continues to be totally reflected until it reaches the small side of the plate in which case the incident angle is now \(39.327^{\circ}\) which is still larger than the angle allowed by Snell's law. This is an ideal material for a scintillator in high energy physics experiments to detect secondary particles. In this case the radiation will eventually reach the surface of a photomultiplier and escape the plastic.

**23.4** The revolution frequency is \(f_{\rm rev}=c/C=1\,\)MHz and the total number of particles orbiting is \(n_{\rm e}=1.5604\times 10^{12}\) electrons or \(3.1208\times 10^{9}\) electrons per bunch. The photon pulses reflect exactly those of the electron bunches. We assume a uniform electron distribution over the bunch length. Therefore, there is a 1 cm long photon pulse every \(0.6\,\)m or one \(30\,\)ps photon pulse every \(2\,\)ns.

**23.5** We use the uncertainty relation \(\Delta x\Delta p=\Delta x\cdot\hbar k\geq\hbar\) or \(\Delta x\geq 1/k\) and the characteristic volume of a photon may be set to \(V_{\rm ph}\approx(\Delta x)^{3}=\left(\frac{\lambda}{2\pi}\right)^{3}\). The average electric field within this volume is from the photon energy \(\hbar\omega=\frac{1}{2\epsilon_{0}}E^{2}V_{\rm ph}\) or \(E=k^{2}\sqrt{2\epsilon_{0}\hbar c}\). For a \(0.1238\,\)eV photon (CO\({}_{2}\) Laser) the wavelength is \(10\,\mu\)m and the average electric field is \(E=2.96\times 10^{-7}\) V/m. In the case of a \(10\,\)keV photon the field is \(E=1.93\,\)kV/m.

**23.6** The relativistic Doppler effect is \(\omega^{\star}\gamma\left(1+\beta_{z}n_{z}^{\star}\right)=\omega\) and for the classical case we set \(\gamma=1\), \(n_{z}^{\star}=-\cos\vartheta\) and \(\beta=v/v_{0}\), where \(v_{0}\) is the velocity of the wave (light or acoustic). The relative Doppler shift is then \(\frac{\Delta f}{f_{0}}=\frac{v}{v_{0}}\cos\vartheta\).

**23.7** The energy loss per turn is from (24.41) \(U_{0}=20.32\,\)keV and the total radiation power \(P=20.32\,\)kW. In case of muons, we have the mass ratio \(m_{\mu}/m_{\rm e}=206.8\) and the energy loss is reduced by the fourth-power of this ratio to become \(U_{\mu}=11.1\,\mu\)eV, which is completely negligible. Besides electrons and positrons there are no other particles that would produce competitive synchrotron radiation.

**23.8** The maximum photon flux occurs at a photon energy of about \(\varepsilon=0.286\varepsilon_{\rm c}\) and \(S(0.286)\approx 0.569\). To find the 1 % photon energy we use (24.61) to scale the photon flux and have \(0.777\sqrt{x}/{\rm e}^{x}=0.00569\), which is solved by \(x=5.795\). Appreciable radiation exists up to almost six times the critical photon energy.

**23.9** From (24.51) the beam energy is \(E=\left[0.4508\,\varepsilon_{\rm c}\,(\rm keV)\,\rho\,(\rm m)\right]^{1/3}=2.0035\,\)GeV. The magnetic field necessary for a bending radius of \(\rho=1.784\,\)m would be \(B=3.75\,\)T, which is beyond conventional magnet saturation. Either superconducting magnets must be used to preserve the ring geometry or a new ring must be constructed with bending magnets which must be longer by about a factor of 2.5 for realistic magnetic fields, but then the beam energy must be increased to keep the critical photon energy.

### Solutions for Chap. 24

**24.1** In the horizontal plane the radiation distribution is uniform and an angle of \(\Delta\psi=0.2\,\mathrm{mr}\) will produce a photon beam width of \(1\,\mathrm{mm}\) at a distance of \(5\,\mathrm{m}\). The critical photon energy is \(\varepsilon_{\mathrm{c}}=563\,\mathrm{eV}\) and \(\varepsilon/\varepsilon_{\mathrm{c}}=0.00022\). For the IR radiation the vertical opening angle \(\theta_{\mathrm{rad}}=11.3\,\mathrm{mr}\) (\(\theta_{\mathrm{rad}}\gg 1/\gamma\)) and the source length \(L=0.045\,\mathrm{m}\). The total source height is \(\sigma_{\mathrm{tot,y}}=\sqrt{0.11^{2}+0.107^{2}}=0.153\,\mathrm{mm}\) and the vertical divergence \(\sigma_{\mathrm{tot,y^{\prime}}}=14.9\,\mathrm{mr}\). The photon flux for \(\lambda=10\,\mathrm{\upmu m}\) and \(S(0.00022)=0.0805\) is \(\frac{\mathrm{d}\dot{N}_{\mathrm{ph}}}{\mathrm{d}\psi}=1.275\times 10^{15}\, \mathrm{photons/s/mr/100\,\%BW}\). The photon brightness is then \(\mathcal{B}=\frac{\left(\mathrm{d}\dot{N}_{\mathrm{ph}}/\mathrm{d}\psi\right) \Delta\psi}{2\pi\sigma_{\mathrm{tot,y^{\prime}}}^{2}\sigma_{\mathrm{tot,y^{ \prime}}}^{2}}=1.162\times 10^{14}\,\mathrm{ph/s/mm^{2}/mr^{2}/100\,\%BW}\).

**24.2** The probability to emit a photon of energy \(\varepsilon\) in a unit time is \(\dot{n}\left(\varepsilon_{\mathrm{ph}}\right)=\frac{P_{\gamma}}{\varepsilon_{ \mathrm{c}}^{2}}\frac{S(x)}{x}\). We are looking for the case \(\varepsilon=\sigma_{\varepsilon}=\frac{E^{2}}{mc^{2}}\sqrt{\frac{55\hbar c}{64 \sqrt{3}mc^{2}J_{\mathrm{s}}\rho}}=10.9\,\mathrm{MeV}\). For \(\varepsilon_{\mathrm{c}}=\frac{3}{2}\hbar c\frac{\gamma^{3}}{\rho}=19,166\, \mathrm{eV}\), the ratio \(x=\frac{\varepsilon}{\varepsilon_{\mathrm{c}}}=\frac{1}{\gamma}\sqrt{\frac{55 mc^{2}\rho}{144\sqrt{3}J_{\mathrm{s}}\hbar c}}=277.54\gg 1\) and \(\frac{P_{\gamma}}{\varepsilon_{\mathrm{c}}^{2}}=23,826\,\frac{1}{\mathrm{eVs}}\). The probability becomes with this \(\dot{n}\left(\varepsilon_{\mathrm{ph}}\right)\approx 2\times 10^{-96}\)! We may, safely assume that no second photon of this energy will be emitted within a damping time. Energy is emitted in very small fractions of the electron energy.

**24.3** From (25.146) we get the number of photons emitted per unit time to be \(\dot{N}_{\mathrm{ph}}=\frac{15\sqrt{3}}{8}\frac{P_{\gamma}}{\varepsilon_{ \mathrm{c}}}=3.158\times 10^{6}\frac{\gamma}{\rho}\) and per radian \(\dot{n}_{\mathrm{ph}}=0.01063\gamma\approx\frac{\gamma}{100}\).

**24.4** The critical photon energy is \(\varepsilon_{\mathrm{c}}=38.04\,\mathrm{keV}\) and \(\varepsilon/\varepsilon_{\mathrm{c}}=0.21\). The universal function is \(S(0.21)=0.5625\) and the photon flux \(\frac{\mathrm{d}\dot{N}_{\mathrm{ph}}}{\mathrm{d}\psi}=3.1185\times 10^{12}\, \mathrm{photons/s/mrad}\). The vertical opening angle \(\sqrt{2\pi}\sigma_{\theta}=0.251\,\mathrm{mrad}\) resulting in an effective beam height at the experiment of \(Y=3.77\,\mathrm{mm}\). A beam size of \(10\)\(\mu\)m at \(15\) m corresponds to an angle of \(0.667\,\mathrm{\upmu rad}\) at the source. The total photon flux into the required sample cross section is then \(\dot{N}_{\mathrm{ph}}=5.53\times 10^{6}\,\mathrm{ph/s}\), which is more than required. For a still higher photon flux one might apply some photon focusing.

**24.5** From problem 24.1 \(L=0.045\,\mathrm{m}\) and the diffraction limited source size and divergence are \(\sigma_{r}=0.107\,\mathrm{mm}\) and \(\sigma_{r^{\prime}}=14.9\,\mathrm{mr}\), respectively. This is to be compared with the electron beam parameters \(\left(\sigma_{\mathrm{b,x}},\sigma_{\mathrm{b,y}}\right)=\left(1.1,0.11\right) \mathrm{mm}\) and \(\left(\sigma_{\mathrm{b,x^{\prime}}},\sigma_{\mathrm{b,y^{\prime}}}\right)= \left(0.11,0.011\right)\mathrm{mr}\). There is a considerable mismatch in the \(x\)-plane with \(\sigma_{r}/\sqrt{2}=0.076\,\mathrm{mm}\) and \(\sigma_{r^{\prime}}/\sqrt{2}=10.5\,\mathrm{mr}\) while in the vertical plane the mismatch is small. In both planes the diffraction limited photon emittance is \(\epsilon_{\mathrm{ph,x,x}}=797\,\mathrm{nm}\), which is much larger than the electron beam emittances in both planes. The \(10\,\mathrm{\upmu m}\) IR radiation is therefore spatially coherent.

The instantaneous radiation power is given by (24.32) as \(P_{\gamma}\left(\mathrm{GeV/s}\right)=379.35B^{2}E^{2}\). The total energy loss of an electron due to wiggler radiation power can be obtained by integrating through the wiggler field for \(\Delta E\left(\mathrm{GeV}\right)=189.67\,B^{2}E^{2}\frac{L_{\mathrm{u}}}{c \beta}\) and the total radiation power for a beam current \(I\) is \(P_{u}\left(\mathrm{W}\right)=632.67\,B^{2}E^{2}L_{\mathrm{u}}I\).

## 5 Solutions for Chap. 25

**25.1**: Integration of (25.61) over \(\varphi\) results in factors \(2\pi\) and \(\pi\) for the two terms in the nominator, respectively and we have the integrals \(2\pi\int_{0}^{\pi}\frac{\sin\theta}{\left(1-\beta\cos\theta\right)^{5}} \mathrm{d}\theta-\pi\left(1-\beta^{2}\right)\int_{0}^{\pi}\frac{\sin^{3} \theta}{\left(1-\beta\cos\theta\right)^{5}}\mathrm{d}\theta=4\pi\gamma^{4} \frac{2}{3}\). With this the radiation power is \(P_{\mathrm{tot}}=\frac{2}{3}r_{\mathrm{c}}mc^{2}\frac{c\beta^{4}\gamma^{4}}{ \rho^{2}}\) which is (24.34).

**25.2**: The vertical opening angle is \(1/\gamma=0.085\,\mathrm{mr}\) and therefore all radiation will be accepted. The spectral photon flux into an opening angle of \(\Delta\psi=10\,\mathrm{mr}\) is \(\dot{N}_{\mathrm{ph}}=C_{\psi}EI\frac{\Delta\omega}{\omega}S\left(\omega/ \omega_{\mathrm{c}}\right)\Delta\psi\) and with a critical photon energy of \(\varepsilon_{\mathrm{c}}=23.94\,\mathrm{keV}\) the spectral photon flux from an ESRF bending magnet is \(\dot{N}_{\mathrm{ph}}=4.75\times 10^{14}\cdot S\left(\frac{\varepsilon_{ \mathrm{ph}}\left(\mathrm{keV}\right)}{23.94}\right)\).

**25.3**: We use (25.88) and get with \(\dot{\xi}=\frac{1}{2}\frac{\omega}{\omega_{\mathrm{c}}}\left(1+\gamma^{2} \theta^{2}\right)^{3/2}\) for the photon flux at \(p\)% the expression \(\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}W(10\,\%)}{\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\omega }/\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}W}{\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\omega}=\left(1+\gamma^ {2}\theta^{2}\right)^{2}\left[\frac{K_{2/3}^{2}\left(\dot{\xi}\right)}{K_{2/3 }^{2}\left(0\right)}+\frac{\gamma^{2}\theta^{2}}{1+\gamma^{2}\theta^{2}} \frac{K_{1/3}^{2}\left(\dot{\xi}\right)}{K_{2/3}^{2}\left(0\right)}\right]=0.1\). Solving for \(\theta\) gives the angle at which the intensity has dropped to \(10\,\%\). For low frequencies \(\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}W(10\,\%)}{\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\omega }/\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}W}{\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\omega}\)\(\underset{\xi\to 0}{\longrightarrow}\)\(1+\frac{\gamma^{2}\theta^{2}}{1+\gamma^{2}\theta^{2}}\frac{\Gamma^{4}(1/3)}{2 8/\Gamma^{4}(2/3)}\left(\frac{\omega}{\omega_{\mathrm{c}}}\right)^{4/3}=p\) and for large arguments \(\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}W(10\,\%)}{\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\omega }/\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}W}{\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\Omega\omega }\)\(\underset{\xi\to\infty}{\longrightarrow}\)\(\frac{1+2\gamma^{2}\theta^{2}}{\sqrt{1+\gamma^{2}\theta^{2}}}\frac{\exp( \omega/\omega_{\mathrm{c}})}{\exp\left[\frac{\omega}{\omega_{\mathrm{c}}} \left(1+\gamma^{2}\theta^{2}\right)^{3/2}\right]}=p\). All expressions have to be evaluated numerically. The angle at which the total radiation intensity has dropped to \(10\,\%\) is from (25.97) given by \(\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}W(10\,\%)}{\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d} \mathrm{d}\omega}/\frac{\mathrm{d}^{2}W}{\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{d}\mathrm{ d}\omega}=\frac{1}{\left(1+\gamma^{2}\theta^{2}\right)^{5/2}}\left(1+\frac{5}{7}\frac{ \gamma^{2}\theta^{2}}{1+\gamma^{2}\theta^{2}}\right)=p\), which can be solved by \(\gamma\theta=1.390\) for \(p=10\,\%\).

## 6 Solutions for Chap. 26

**26.1**: The amplitude of the oscillatory motion in an undulator is from (26.6) \(a_{\perp}=\frac{\lambda_{p}K}{2\pi\gamma}=0.581\,\mathrm{\upmu m}\). The longitudinal oscillation amplitude is from (26.5) \(a_{\parallel}=\frac{K}{8\gamma^{2}k_{p}}=0.053\,\mathrm{\AA}\). Both amplitudes are very small, yet are responsible for the high intensities of radiation.

**26.2** The focal length of a single pole end is given by (7.75) \(\frac{1}{f_{\rm i.}}=\frac{\pi^{2}}{2\gamma^{2}}\frac{K^{2}}{\lambda_{\rm p}}=2.58 \times 10^{-5}\,{\rm m}^{-1}\) and for the whole undulator \(\frac{1}{f_{\rm y.}}=\frac{\pi^{2}}{2\gamma^{2}}\frac{K^{2}}{\lambda_{\rm p}} 2N=0.00258\,{\rm m}^{-1}\) or \(f_{\rm y.}=387.60\,{\rm m}\). This focal length is very long compared to the focal lengths of the ring quadrupole, which are of the order of the distance between quadrupoles. Typically, the focal length of any insertion device should be more than about \(50\,{\rm m}\) to be negligible. The wiggler magnet with \(K=5\), on the other hand, produces a focal length of \(f_{\rm y.}=15.50\,{\rm m}\) which is too strong to be ignored and must be compensated. The difference comes from the fact that its the deflection angle which is responsible for focusing and \(\frac{1}{f_{\rm y.}}\propto\theta^{2}\). Focusing occurs only in the nondeflecting plane and \(\frac{1}{f_{\rm z.}}=0\).

**26.3** This result appears nonphysical, yet it is correct, but requires some interpretation. If the experimenter uses all radiation into the forward cone the photon flux is independent of \(N_{\rm p}\), but as \(N_{\rm p}\) becomes smaller the bandwidth increases. That is not as experimenters generally use synchrotron radiation. They use spectrometers to cut out a very small bandwidth \(\frac{\delta\omega}{\omega}\ll\frac{1}{N_{\rm p}}\) and in this case the useful band width is independent of \(N_{\rm p}\) and the photon flux is proportional to \(N_{\rm p}\).

**26.4** To solve this problem, we do not rely on exact calculations, but are satisfied with the precision of reading the graph (Fig. 24.5). We also use iterations to get the solution we want. The fundamental flux drops below \(10\,\%\) for \(K<0.25\) and we use this value to get \(15\,{\rm keV}\) radiation. From the definition of the fundamental photon energy the periodlength is \(\lambda_{\rm p}=3.0\,{\rm cm}\). To generate \(4\,{\rm keV}\) radiation we need to change \(K\) enough to raise the factor \(\left(1+\frac{1}{2}K^{2}\right)\) from a low value of \(1.031\) by a factor of \(15/4\) to a value of \(3.87\) or to a value of \(K=2.4\), which corresponds to a field of \(B=0.857\,{\rm T}\). Unfortunately that field requires a gap of \(8.1\,{\rm mm}\) which is less than allowed. We have to increase the period length to say \(\lambda_{\rm p}=3.0\,{\rm cm}\), which gives a maximum photon energy for \(K=0.25\) of \(\varepsilon_{\rm ph}=12.9\,{\rm keV}\). We plan to use the \(3^{\rm rd}\) harmonic to reach \(15\,{\rm keV}\). To reach \(\varepsilon_{\rm ph}=4\,{\rm keV}\) we need \(K=2.16\) and a field of \(B=0.661\,{\rm T}\) which requires an allowable gap of \(g=11.7\,{\rm mm}\). We use the \(3^{\rm rd}\) harmonic to reach \(\varepsilon_{\rm ph}=15\,{\rm keV}\) at \(K=1.82\). With this result we may even extend the spectral range on both ends.

**26.5** In the electron system the wavelength of the laser beam is Lorentz contracted by a factor of \(1/(2\gamma)\), where the factor of two is due to the fact that the relative velocity between both beams is \(2c\). The wavelength in the laboratory system is therefore \(\lambda=\frac{\lambda_{\rm L}}{4\gamma^{2}}\) since \(K\ll 1\) for the laser field.

**26.6** The maximum transverse oscillation amplitude is \(4.57\,{\rm\mu m}\) and the transverse velocity in units of \(c\) is just equal to the maximum deflection angle \(\beta\bot=\theta=K/\gamma=0.38\,{\rm m}\). The transverse relativistic factor \(\gamma\bot\approx 1+7.22\cdot 10^{-8}\), indeed very small, yet enough to start generating relativistic perturbations in the transverse particle motion.

**26.7**: The fundamental wavelength is \(\lambda=\frac{\lambda p}{2\gamma^{2}}\left(1+\frac{1}{2}K^{2}+\gamma^{2}\vartheta^ {2}\right)\) and for \(\vartheta=0\) we have the fundamental wavelength \(\lambda=10.88\,\)A. The natural bandwidth is \(\frac{\Delta\omega}{\omega}=\frac{1}{N_{\rm p}}\) and we look therefore for an angle \(\hat{\vartheta}\) such that the wavelength has increased by no more than \(9\,\%\), or \(\frac{\gamma^{2}\hat{\vartheta}^{2}}{1+\frac{1}{2}K^{2}}=0.09\) and solving for \(\hat{\vartheta}\),we get \(\hat{\vartheta}=\pm 62.6\,\mu\)rad.

**26.8**: In first approximation, we assume that all the fields are contained within the volume between the two rows of poles and no field leaks out. Separating the poles by \(g\) requires to generate the additional field energy \({\rm d}e=F{\rm d}g\) where \(F\) is the force between poles. Since \({\rm d}e>0\) for \({\rm d}g>0\) the force is attractive meaning that the poles are attracted. The force is then \(F=\frac{{\rm d}e}{{\rm d}g}=\frac{w}{2\mu_{0}}\int_{0}^{15\lambda p}B^{2}\left( z\right){\rm d}z=47,024\,\)N = \(4.70\,\)tons.

**26.9**: In the electron rest frame energy conservation requires \(\hbar\omega+mc^{2}=\hbar\omega^{\prime}+\sqrt{c^{2}p^{2}+mc^{2}}\) where \(\hbar\omega\) and \(\hbar\omega^{\prime}\) are the incoming and outgoing photon energies, respectively and \(cp\) the electron momentum after the scattering process. Solving for \(cp\) we get \(c^{2}p^{2}=\hbar^{2}\left(\omega-\omega^{\prime}\right)^{2}+2\hbar mc^{2}\left( \omega-\omega^{\prime}\right)\). For momentum conservation, we require that \(\hbar\mathbf{k}=\hbar\mathbf{k}^{\prime}+\mathbf{p}\) with the angle \(\vartheta\) between \(k\) and \(p\). From this we get \(c^{2}p^{2}=\left(\hbar\omega^{\prime}\right)^{2}+\left(\hbar\omega\right)^{2}- 2\hbar^{2}\omega\omega^{\prime}\cos\vartheta\). Comparing booth expressions for \(cp\) we get \(-2\hbar\omega\omega^{\prime}+2\hbar mc^{2}\left(\omega-\omega^{\prime}\right)= -2\hbar^{2}\omega\omega^{\prime}\cos\vartheta\) or \(\frac{\hbar}{mc^{2}}\left(1-\cos\vartheta\right)=\frac{1}{\omega^{\prime}}- \frac{1}{\omega}=\frac{\lambda^{\prime}-\lambda}{2\pi c}\).We look for radiation emitted in the forward direction or for \(\vartheta=180^{\circ}\) and get for the scattered wavelength \(\lambda^{\prime}=\lambda\) because \(\frac{4\pi\hbar c}{mc^{2}}\approx 4.8\times 10^{12}\ll\lambda\). Note, that all quantities are still defined in the electron rest frame. The wavelength of the undulator field in the electron system is \(\lambda=\lambda_{\rm p}^{*}/\gamma\), where now \({\cal L}^{*}\)the laboratory system of reference and the scattered radiation in the laboratory system due to the Doppler effect is \(\lambda^{*}=\frac{\lambda_{\rm p}^{*}}{2\gamma^{2}}\left(1+\frac{1}{2}K^{2}\right)\), which is the expression for the fundamental wavelength of undulator radiation.

**26.10**: The photon flux density in the forward cone from a given undulator and storage ring is proportional to (26.61). For the fundamental the maximum value is reached for \(K=1.1985\) with an amplitude of \(A_{1}\left(1.1985\right)=0.381\). An intensity of \(90\,\%\) has an amplitude of \(~{}0.343\) which corresponds to \(K\)-values of \(K=0.873\) and \(K=1.642\).

**26.11**: Equation (26.54) is for \(\vartheta=0\) proportional to \(\left(-K\sum_{2}\right)^{2}\) and we look at the factor \(\sum_{2}=\sum_{m=-\infty}^{\infty}J_{-m}(u)\) [\(J_{k-2m-1}(v)+J_{k-2m+1}(v)\)] to select harmonics. Here \(u=\frac{\omega}{\omega_{1}}S\) and \(v=\frac{\omega}{\omega_{1}}C\). Furthermore \(C\propto\vartheta=0\) and \(S\propto K^{2}\tilde{\beta}\). Therefore \(v=0\) and [\(J_{k-2m-1}(0)+J_{k-2m+1}(0)\)] = 0 for all indices which are non-zero. Only for \(k=2m\pm 1\) are the indices equal to zero and [\(J_{0}(0)+J_{0}(0)\)] \(\neq 0\). Finally \(\sum_{2}=0\) for all even values of \(k\) and \(\sum_{2}\neq 0\) only for odd values of \(k\).

**26.12**: To get elliptically polarized radiation we look at (26.51) and try to find one real term together with an imaginary term in the other plane to be non-zero at the same time. We also remember that undulator radiation is emitted only at odd harmonics \(k=2m\pm 1\). From (26.51) we note that the \(\hat{\bf x}\)-terms are both non-zero but the \(\hat{\bf y}B_{0}\)-term has a factor \(J_{k-2m}(v)\) for which \(v=0\) in the forward direction and\(J_{k-2m}(0)=0\) for all non-zero indices. Since \(k\) is odd \(J_{k-2m}(0)=0\) for all odd values of \(k\) and with it the \(\hat{\mathfrak{y}}B_{0}\)-term is zero too. Therefore there is no elliptical polarization. Of course the radiation from each pole is elliptically polarized, say, clock-wise but that polarization is compensated by the counter-clock-wise radiation from the next pole.

**26.13** The best approach to solve this design problem is to use a computer program like EXCEL. There are many parameters and the photon wavelength must be calculated many times. Specify beam energy, period length and min/max desired wavelengths. Calculate fundamental wavelength for \(K_{\rm min}/K_{\rm max}\). For reasonable intensities \(K_{\rm min}\gtrsim 0.5\). \(K_{\rm max}\) determines the maximum field. At this point we can only guess, say \(K_{\rm max}=6\). Calculate min/max wavelength or photon energies for up to seventh harmonic. Try to find period length which covers the desired spectrum. From the undulator strength parameter calculate the maximum field strength. The maximum field in a permanent magnet undulator depends on the gap and period length. For a closed undulator assume a minimum gap of \(\pm 10\,\)mm. That means to reach, say \(1.5\,\)T, the period length should be longer than about \(5\)-\(6\,\)cm (see Fig. 24.5). Note, do not assume that you must find a perfect solution that covers the whole desired spectrum. If, for example, you desire low energy photons from an unduator in a high energy storage ring you will not find a solution with a reasonable value of \(K\). Sometimes the harmonic spectra just will not close. In this case several undulators with different period length and automatically exchangeable can be used. Such undulators are also known as "revolver"-type undulators.

**26.14** The fundamental wave length for a weak undulator (\(K<1\)) are \(\lambda\left(800\,{\rm MeV}\right)=102\,\)A and \(\lambda\left(7\,{\rm GeV}\right)=1.33\,\)A which are the shortest achievable wavelength. For a \(10\,\)mm gap the field is from (24.5) \(B=1.198\,\)T and the maximum value of the strength parameter is \(K=5.595\). With this, the longest fundamental wavelength is \(\lambda=1698.5\,\)A for the \(800\,\)MeV ring and \(\lambda=22.14\,\)A for the \(7\,\)GeV ring.

**26.15** The short wavelength limits are given for a weak undulator (\(K<1\)) and are \(\lambda=3.13\,\)A for \(\lambda_{\rm p}=15\,\)mm and \(\lambda=15.7\,\)A for \(\lambda_{\rm p}=75\,\)mm. The long wavelength limits are determined by the magnetic fields when the undulator gaps are closed to \(10\,\)mm. The fields are from (24.5) \(B\left(\lambda_{\rm p}=15{\rm mm}\right)=0.19\,\)T and \(B\left(\lambda_{\rm p}=75{\rm mm}\right)=1.66\,\)T, respectively. The undulator strengths are \(K\left(\lambda_{\rm p}=15\,{\rm mm}\right)=0.270\) and \(K\left(\lambda_{\rm p}=75\,{\rm mm}\right)=1.35\) and the wavelengths \(\lambda\left(\lambda_{\rm p}=15\,{\rm mm}\right)=3.24\)A and \(\lambda\left(\lambda_{\rm p}=15\,{\rm mm}\right)=30.0\,\)A. The tuning range is very small for the \(15\,\)mm undulator and about a factor of two for the long period undulator. The tuning ranges are so different because the \(K\)-value can be varied much more for longer period undulators.

## Solutions for Chap. 27

**27.1** We may solve this problem two ways. First, we use the average drift velocity \(\overline{\beta}=\beta\left(1-\frac{K^{2}}{4y^{2}}\right)\) and calculate the time \(t_{\rm e}=\frac{\lambda_{\rm p}}{c\overline{\beta}}\approx\frac{\lambda_{\rm p }}{c\overline{\beta}}\left(1+\frac{K^{2}}{4y^{2}}\right)\) it takes the electron to travel along one period. During that same time the photon travels a distance \(s_{\gamma}=ct_{\rm e}=\frac{\lambda_{\rm p}}{\beta}\left(1+\frac{K^{2}}{4y^{2} }\right)\) and the difference is \(\delta s=s_{\gamma}-\lambda_{\rm p}=\lambda_{\rm p}\left(\frac{1}{\beta}-1 \right)+\frac{\lambda_{\rm p}}{\beta}\frac{K^{2}}{4y^{2}}\approx\frac{\lambda _{\rm p}}{2y^{2}}\left(1+\frac{1}{2}K^{2}\right)\), which is just equal to the fundamental radiation wave length. We may also integrate the path length along the sinusoidal trajectory and get for one quarter period \(s_{\rm e}=\frac{\lambda_{\rm p}}{2y^{2}}\int_{0}^{\pi/2}\sqrt{1+\theta^{2} \cos^{2}x}\mathrm{d}x=\frac{\lambda_{\rm p}}{2y^{2}}\mathrm{EllipticE}\!\left( -\theta^{2}\right)\) which is the Legendre elliptical integral of the second kind. Since the argument will always be very small, we may expand \(\mathrm{EllipticE}\!\left(-\theta^{2}\right)\approx\frac{\pi}{2}+0.393\theta^{2}\) for small arguments and get the electron travel time for one period \(t_{\rm e}=4\frac{\lambda_{\rm p}}{2\pi}\frac{1}{c\beta}\left(\frac{\pi}{2}+0.3 93\theta^{2}\right)\). The path length difference between the photon, \(\lambda_{\rm p}\) and electron \(ct_{\rm e}\) is \(\delta s=ct_{\rm e}-\lambda_{\rm p}=\lambda_{\rm p}\frac{1}{\beta}\left(1+ \frac{0.393\theta^{2}}{\pi/2}\right)-\lambda_{\rm p}\approx\frac{\lambda_{\rm p }}{2y^{2}}\left(1+\underbrace{\frac{8\cdot 0.393}{\pi}}_{\approx 1}\frac{1}{2}K^{2}\right)\) which is again the fundamental wavelength of radiation.

**27.2** In a helical undulator the transverse as well as the longitudinal motion are uniform and therefore there are no varying relativistic effects perturbing the uniform motion. A Fourier transform of the motion will therefore only exhibit one, the fundamental harmonic.

**27.3** The total energy of the photon flux is \(E_{\gamma}=\rho N_{\rm e}E\) into a band width of \(\frac{\Delta\omega}{\omega}=\frac{1}{N_{\rm p}}\) and the number of coherent x-ray photons of energy \(\varepsilon_{\rm x}\) per electron is \(n_{\rm ph,coh}=\frac{E_{\gamma}}{\varepsilon_{\rm x}N_{\rm c}}=717.5\). On the other hand the radiation pulse energy from an undulator into the forward cone per electron and band width \(\frac{\Delta\omega}{\omega}=\frac{1}{N_{\rm p}}\) is \(n_{\rm ph,incoh}=\frac{1}{2}\pi\alpha\left(1+\frac{1}{2}K^{2}\right)A_{1}\left( K\right)=0.015\). The SASE process accounts for about five orders of magnitude in photon flux per electron.

