===============================
Hello World Tutorial
===============================

This tutorial builds a simple weather agent to get you from zero to a working Osprey
application quickly. You'll learn the essentials: project structure, MCP tool
implementation, and running your agent.

We use a single tool with straightforward logic to keep things minimal while
you learn the framework basics. The :doc:`conceptual-tutorial` and
:doc:`control-assistant` demonstrate more complex patterns when you're ready
to scale up.

What You'll Build
=================

A "Hello World Weather" agent is a simple agent that:

* Responds to natural language weather queries
* Uses a mock API for realistic weather data
* Demonstrates the complete tool invocation and response flow
* Shows framework integration patterns

By the end of this guide, you'll have a working agent that responds to queries like "What's the weather in Prague?" with temperature and conditions data.

.. dropdown:: **Prerequisites**
   :color: info
   :icon: list-unordered

   **Required:**

   - Python 3.11+ with virtual environment
   - Osprey framework installed via ``uv sync``
   - API key from your chosen provider (we recommend Claude Haiku 4.5, but any OpenAI-compatible provider works including institutional services)

   If you haven't installed the framework yet, follow the :doc:`installation guide <installation>`.

   **Optional but Recommended:** Basic understanding of Python and async/await patterns.

Step 1: Create the Project
---------------------------

.. tab-set::

   .. tab-item:: Interactive Mode (Recommended)

      The easiest way to create your project is using the interactive menu:

      .. code-block:: bash

         osprey

      This launches an interactive terminal UI that will:

      1. Guide you through template selection (choose ``hello_world_weather``)
      2. Help you select an AI provider and model (we recommend **Claude Haiku 4.5**)
      3. Automatically detect and configure API keys
      4. Create a ready-to-use project

      Just follow the prompts, and you'll have a complete project set up in minutes!

   .. tab-item:: Direct CLI Command

      If you prefer direct commands or are automating project creation:

      .. code-block:: bash

         osprey init weather-agent --template hello_world_weather
         cd weather-agent

      This is perfect for scripts, automation, or when you already know exactly what you want.

Both methods create identical project structures. Use whichever fits your workflow.

.. admonition:: PLACEHOLDER: CONFIG-ARCHITECTURE
   :class: warning

   **Old content (line 76):** "Generated Project Structure" showing src/ layout with capabilities/, context_classes.py, registry.py, framework_prompts.py
   **New equivalent:** Needs human judgment
   **Why this is fuzzy:** The new Claude Code architecture uses MCP servers and .claude/ configuration instead of the old capabilities/registry/context_classes structure. The generated project tree is entirely different.
   **Action needed:** Document the actual project structure generated by ``osprey init`` for the Claude Code architecture.

.. admonition:: Want to see it in action first?
   :class: tip

   If you're the type who likes to play with the toy before reading the manual, jump straight to :ref:`Step 5: Run Your Agent <hello-world-deploy-test>` to get your agent running in minutes! You can always come back here to understand how everything works under the hood.

This tutorial will walk you through understanding how each component works and how they integrate together to create a complete AI agent application.

Step 2: The Mock Data Source
----------------------------

The ``mock_weather_api.py`` file provides a deterministic weather data provider that eliminates external API dependencies while demonstrating the framework's tool integration patterns.

.. code-block:: python

   """
   Simple Mock Weather API
   """

   import random
   from datetime import datetime
   from dataclasses import dataclass

   @dataclass
   class CurrentWeatherReading:
       """Simple weather data model."""
       location: str
       temperature: float
       conditions: str
       timestamp: datetime

   class SimpleWeatherAPI:
       """
       Mock weather API that returns weather data for any location string.
       """

       def get_current_weather(self, location: str) -> CurrentWeatherReading:
           """Get simple current weather for a location."""
           # Implementation details below...

The full implementation randomly selects from weather conditions (Sunny, Cloudy, Rainy, etc.) and generates temperatures in the 0-35C range. See the generated project's ``mock_weather_api.py`` for the complete source.

Step 3: Building the Weather MCP Tool
--------------------------------------

.. admonition:: PLACEHOLDER: CONCEPTUAL-MAPPING
   :class: warning

   **Old content (line 301):** "Capabilities are the business logic units that perform specific tasks" -- described BaseCapability subclass with @capability_node decorator, execute() method, classify_error(), get_retry_policy(), _create_orchestrator_guide(), _create_classifier_guide()
   **New equivalent:** Needs human judgment
   **Why this is fuzzy:** Capabilities as Python classes (BaseCapability, @capability_node) have been replaced by MCP tools exposed via FastMCP servers. The error classification, retry policy, orchestrator guide, and classifier guide patterns have no direct MCP equivalent.
   **Action needed:** Write the MCP tool version of the weather capability showing how the same business logic is exposed as an MCP tool, and explain which old patterns (error classification, orchestrator/classifier guides) are handled differently or no longer needed.

Step 4: Domain Adaptation
--------------------------

Weather applications need to synthesize information from multi-turn conversations where location, time, and weather concerns are mentioned across different exchanges.

**The Problem**

Consider this conversation:

.. code-block:: text

   User: I'm planning a trip and need to check weather patterns
   Agent: I can help with weather patterns for your trip! Which destination are you considering?
   User: I'm thinking about New York
   Agent: Great! When are you planning to visit New York?
   User: Next weekend, and I'm particularly concerned about rain

The final message should extract a complete weather query: **"Get weather forecast for New York for next weekend with focus on precipitation."** This requires understanding that:

- Location ("New York") was mentioned two exchanges ago
- Time ("next weekend") was just specified
- "Concerned about rain" should translate into prioritizing precipitation data (weather-domain knowledge)

Without domain-specific context, the agent might not recognize that "concerned about rain" should translate into prioritizing precipitation information - this is weather-specific context that doesn't apply to other domains.

.. admonition:: PLACEHOLDER: CONCEPTUAL-MAPPING
   :class: warning

   **Old content (line 647):** Domain adaptation via WeatherTaskExtractionPromptBuilder subclassing DefaultTaskExtractionPromptBuilder, using osprey.prompts and osprey.state imports, with 8 TaskExtractionExample instances
   **New equivalent:** Needs human judgment
   **Why this is fuzzy:** The old prompt builder system (osprey.prompts, osprey.state, MessageUtils, UserMemories, TaskExtractionExample, ExtractedTask) is deleted. Claude Code handles multi-turn context natively, but domain-specific prompt customization may now happen through CLAUDE.md, system prompts, or MCP server descriptions.
   **Action needed:** Explain how domain-specific prompt tuning works in the Claude Code architecture (e.g., via CLAUDE.md instructions, agent definitions, or MCP tool descriptions).

.. _hello-world-deploy-test:

Step 5: Run Your Agent
-----------------------

Now that you understand the components, let's run and test your agent!

**1. Configure Your API Key**

Set up your ``.env`` file with your API key:

.. code-block:: bash

   # Copy the template
   cp .env.example .env

   # Edit .env and add your API key
   # ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your-key-here     # If using Anthropic (recommended)
   # CBORG_API_KEY=your-key-here         # If using LBNL CBorg
   # STANFORD_API_KEY=your-key-here      # If using Stanford AI Playground
   # ARGO_API_KEY=your-key-here          # If using ANL Argo
   # OPENAI_API_KEY=your-key-here        # If using OpenAI
   # GOOGLE_API_KEY=your-key-here        # If using Google

.. admonition:: Model Recommendation
   :class: tip

   **We recommend Claude Haiku 4.5** for the best experience. It provides excellent performance, low latency, and works exceptionally well with the framework's structured outputs. However, the framework works with any provider - including institutional services like LBNL CBorg, Stanford AI Playground, ANL Argo, or commercial providers like OpenAI and Google.

See the :doc:`installation guide <installation>` for detailed instructions on obtaining API keys from each supported provider (Anthropic, OpenAI, Google, LBNL CBorg, Stanford, ANL Argo, Ollama).

**2. Start the Chat Interface**

.. code-block:: bash

   osprey claude chat

**3. Test Your Agent**

Ask weather-related questions:

.. code-block:: text

   You: What's the weather in San Francisco?
   You: How's the weather in Prague?
   You: Tell me the current conditions in New York
   You: What's the weather like?

.. admonition:: PLACEHOLDER: MISSING-EXAMPLE
   :class: warning

   **Old content (line 1179):** Detailed 4-phase execution trace showing Framework Initialization, Task Processing Pipeline (task extraction, classification, orchestration), Execution Planning (step-by-step orchestrator output), and Real-Time Execution with status messages
   **New equivalent:** Needs human judgment
   **Why this is fuzzy:** The old execution trace showed LangGraph-based orchestration (classifier, orchestrator, capability nodes, context storage). Claude Code uses a fundamentally different execution model with MCP tool calls. The observable output will look completely different.
   **Action needed:** Capture an actual ``osprey claude chat`` session trace for the weather agent and document the new execution phases.

**What You've Built**

By completing this tutorial, you've created an agentic system that demonstrates:

- **Modular Architecture**: Your MCP tools integrate seamlessly with the framework
- **Scalable Orchestration**: Claude Code coordinates multiple tools as needed
- **Human-in-the-Loop Safety**: Mandatory approval for hardware writes
- **Informative UX**: Real-time status updates and structured responses

Next Steps
==========

Experiment with Your Agent
---------------------------

Now that you have a working agent, try these experiments:

**Test additional capabilities:**

- "Save the current weather in Prague to my memories"
- "Calculate the square root of the temperature in San Francisco"

**Modify your tool:**

- Add support for more cities
- Add new weather attributes (humidity, wind speed)
- Try different response formats

Scale to Production
-------------------

Ready to see Osprey at production scale? The :doc:`control-assistant`
demonstrates a complete industrial control system with multiple MCP tools working
together, complex orchestration patterns, and production deployment with a web UI.

This is where you'll see the modular architecture patterns from the
:doc:`conceptual-tutorial` applied to a real-world application.
